
    Pikmin 2 - complete guide

    Version 1.0.1

    By J

NOTE: this guide concerns the PAL version of this game.  There are some
differences between this and other versions, especially with treasures.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.0. Contents
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To search for a particular section, append references together with dots
in-between and at start and end, e.g. '.3.1.5.'.

* = incomplete section
** = section not started

0.  Contents

1.  Legal and contact

2.  Introduction

3.  Current content

4.  Main game
  1.  Gameplay
    1.  Hazards
    2.  Carrying items and producing Pikmin
    3.  Tips
    4.  Items and obstacles
  2.  Discovering the Pikmin
    1.  Red Pikmin
    2.  Purple Pikmin
    3.  White Pikmin
    4.  Yellow Pikmin
    5.  Blue Pikmin
    6.  Bulbmin
  3.  Areas
    1.  Valley of Repose
    2.  Awakening Wood
    3.  Perplexing Pool
    4.  Wistful Wild
  4.  Treasures
    1.  Quick guide/walkthrough plan
    2.  Overground
      1.  Valley of Repose
      2.  Awakening Wood
      3.  Perplexing Pool
      4.  Wistful Wild
    3.  Underground
      1.  Emergence Cave
      2.  Subterranean Complex
      3.  Frontier Cavern
      4.  Hole of Beasts
      5.  White Flower Garden
      6.  Bulblax Kingdom
      7.  Snagret Hole
      8.  Citadel of Spiders
      9.  Glutton's Kitchen
      11. Submerged Castle
      10. Shower Room
      12. Cavern of Chaos
      13. Hole of Heroes
      14. Dream Den
    4.  Exploration Kit
    5.  Treasure list
  5.  Piklopedia
    1.  Plant list
    2.  Candypop Buds
    3.  Beasts

5.  Challenge Mode**
  1.  Unlocking**
  2.  Tips**
  3.  Guide**

6.  2-Player Mode**
  1.  Unlocking**
  2.  Tips**
  3.  Winning**
    1.  General strategies**
    2.  Arena-specific strategies**
  4.  Other things to do**

7.  Unlockables**
  1.  Modes**
  2.  Movies**
  3.  Notes**

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.1. Legal and contact
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This guide is distributed under a Creative Commons license
(Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0):

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/

If you come across any significant section of this guide and its use does not
comply with the above terms, please e-mail me.

To contact me to either suggest information or ideas or point out corrections,
use e-mail.  The e-mail address to use is J49137@gmail.com.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.2. Introduction
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is a walkthrough for the Nintendo GameCube game Pikmin 2.  I hope to
cover:
 - General gameplay information.
 - Finding all of the game's 201 treasures and 5 colours of Pikmin in the main
   game.
 - Strategies for finding them within a small time period, losing few or no
   Pikmin.
 - Strategies with which to defeat all beasts, including bosses.
 - Unlocking all available movies and notes.
 - Completing every challenge in the Challenge Mode, losing no Pikmin.
 - Strategies to help win 2-Player mode matches and new ways to play this mode.

The Pikmin 'Captains', or Olimar, Louie and the President, are interchangeable.
If I mention one, it does not matter which; if I mention the use of both
Captains, use the two you have - this depends upon the level of completion
of the game at that point.

The way I have written this guide is most like a walkthrough during underground
areas' sections.  Otherwise, because of the non-linear gameplay in Pikmin 2, I
have simply given guides to find each treasure separately, to act as either a
reference section or a walkthrough would.  The collection of treasures is
found in the 'Treasures' section (4.4), along with the 'Quick guide/walkthrough
plan' (4.4.1) if you really can't work out what to do next.  I could have
explained what to do, step by step, but that would take the strategy out of the
game - and you wouldn't want that, would you?

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.3. Current content
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

At the moment, this guide contains:
- Basic gameplay information, concerning producing Pikmin and carrying items
  and the game's hazards, items and obstacles, as well as a number of tips.
- Use of the different colours of Pikmin, and guides as to how to obtain them.
- Walkthrough for all areas and treasures.
- Reference information on enemies, plants and treasures.

The guide for the main game is complete; only other modes are left.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4. Main game
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This first section is the main game of Pikmin 2; it can be accessed from the
main menu as 'Begin'.  This section of the guide contains the locations of all
201 treasures of the game, how to get them, strategies to use in completing the
game, and various other gameplay help and reference material.

I take it into account, during the writing of this section, that you have read
the game manual and therefore know the basic controls.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.1. Gameplay
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This section helps with gameplay generally, and is not the walkthrough part of
this guide.  Subsections concern hazards, Pikmin, items, obstacles and general
tips.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.1.1. Hazards
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Naturally, I will begin by explaining the possible ways in which Pikmin can
die...

  FIRE

Red Pikmin and Bulbmin alone remain unaffected by this.  If any other Pikmin
meet fire, they have a period during which they run around like headless
chickens, and you can whistle them out of that state.  At the start of the
game, the two Captains take damage in the vicinity of fire; to change this, you
must collect Forged Courage, in the Hole of Beasts in Awakening Wood.

Fire is found on the back of a Fiery Bulblax, through the mouth/snout of a
Fiery Blowhog, around an angry Fiery Dweevil, and up through vents in the
ground (underground only).  These vents turn on and off for a few seconds
either way; this means that any Pikmin can attack them while off, but it is
usually better to be safe and use Red Pikmin.

  ELECTRICITY

Yellow Pikmin and Bulbmin are the ones resistant to electricity.  In order to
become resistant yourself, you must return Dream Material to the Research Pod,
in the sixth and final sublevel of Glutton's Kitchen, found in Perplexing Pool.
Electricity KILLS PIKMIN INSTANTLY.  This means that there is no headless
chicken time; they cannot be whistled to safety.  It makes a nice sound,
though...

Electricity is found as a path-blocking beam between 2 conductors, or running
as an electric current in an electric fence - which can only be demolished
with Yellow Pikmin (not Bulbmin, due to their absence overground).  The
beams, like the fire-spewing vents, turn on and off, so any Pikmin can attack
them.  However, as with fire above, it is better to use Yellow Pikmin,
especially when you remember electricity's instant kill.  Electricity is also
emitted by Anode Beetles and Anode Dweevils.

  POISON

This, again, fails to harm Bulbmin - and, this time, White Pikmin.  However,
the two Captains are also resistant to this from the start - due, of course, to
their spacesuits.  Like fire, there is a certain amount of time after Pikmin
are affected in which to whistle them back, while they bounce about the floor
in all conceivable directions.

Poison itself is a billowing purple gas with darker spots of deep purple that
is made by Doodlebugs, Munge Dweevils and round, floor-bound pipes.  These
pipes are also found under certain gates, so that only White Pikmin can
demolish them.

  WATER

Water covers large sections of many caves, the entrance to Submerged castle
and vast areas of all 4 landing sites.  It does not have an effect on Blue
Pikmin, Bulbmin, Olimar and Louie (though the Captains are harmed by any
beasts' high-powered water jets).  In quite a few areas of water, there is a
large rock plug, which is either above a hole or rips the ground apart at its
removal.  Using Blue Pikmin, it can be removed and the water drained away.
A creature that uses water in an attack is the Watery Blowhog, though many
others prefer to reside in it rather than on land.  Caustic Dweevils release an
acidic liquid that looks similar to water and affects Pikmin in the same way.

  SUNSET

This is not really a hazard, as such: the beasts are the actual hazards, but
this is a different way in which the enemies can get to your precious Pikmin.
At the end of a day, when you are asked to collect all of your Pikmin to you
and are told that sunset is near, you must do so.  A count-down will ensue,
after which night-time begins, and the area's beasts awake.  The rocket and
Pikmin Onions leave the planet until morning to be safe, but any Pikmin left
behind on the planet will die.  When the ship takes off with the Onions, you
can see the beasts emerge and eat any Pikmin that are there.  Those that die
here show the colours, but not numbers, of Pikmin that remain and die.

Pikmin will not be left behind if they are in their Onions or the rocket, are
with either one of the Captains, or are in the general vicinity of the landing
area.  Planted Pikmin will be left behind but will not die; when you return to
that particular area, they will most likely be flowers.

  BEASTS

These last hazards are ones that always harm Louie and Olimar, hazards to the
Captains that no treasures can remove (though the damage taken can be lowered
by the collection of Justice Alloy).  Beasts eat, crush, attack with
explosions, poison, fire, electricity, water, boulders and falling rocks, suck
Pikmin up or pull them into holes.

When Pikmin are eaten, there is a small period of time in which they can be
regained before they are swallowed and die.  They can be saved by killing the
beast before it swallows; next, wait until the beast's ghost appears (always
roughly rounded, though variable in size) and the Pikmin should come out of the
body.  This fact is used in the strategy that defeats various beasts, in that
it does not matter if any are eaten, as they will come back.  You can always
tell if a Pikmin has died, as their ghost will appear; this remains the colour
and size of the Pikmin, and is more of a traditional 'ghost' shape.  When
various beasts eat Pikmin, there is a different time after which the Pikmin
will die, which varies by beast from immediately to a few seconds, and much
longer for Jellyfloats.

Note that Captains are harmed by certain beasts' electricity and fire even with
the protective treasures, if not as much.  This occurs because of the force
exerted upon them by the jet/beam.  There are some beasts that cannot kill
Pikmin, but plant them instead, and some that can immobilise a Captain by
picking him up in some way.  Whenever the latter happens, rotate the Analogue
Stick rapidly to escape.  Finally, Jellyfloats, Hermit Crawmads and Breadbugs
have unique ways of killing Pikmin.

 EXPLOSIONS

Explosions are caused by bomb rocks, which are spherical though roughly-shaped
rocks that have yellow cracks across the surface.  They have a life meter that
diminishes only once the rock has landed, been hit using A, or set off by a
Pikmin, Careening Dirigibug or Volatile Dweevil, the latter 2 of which carry
them.  The rock pulses, swells, emits beams of light and, finally, explodes,
KILLING ANY PIKMIN INSTANTLY and harming Captains within a set range.  They can
fall from the sky in some caves, be carried by Volatile Dweevils or Careening
Dirigibugs, or be lying still, ready to be disturbed on the ground; in some
places they can be used to kill enemies.

  BOULDERS/FALLING ROCKS

Boulders harm Pikmin by squashing them.  They fall from the sky when a large
enemy, such as an Empress Bulblax or the Segmented Crawbster, hits a wall with
force, and also fall in random places of some sublevels when you go near.  They
are noticeable by the shadows they make on the ground and whistling as they
fall.  They harm Captains, Pikmin and Bulbmin only if they are hit directly,
once again KILLING THEM INSTANTLY.  The best strategy to use in their imminent
landing is to run, using C to speed up the Pikmin; otherwise, swarm the Pikmin
against a wall and hope they will survive.

  ABYSS

By 'abyss', I refer to the outside of certain underground sublevels in caves.
It is relevant only in those that resemble floating islands, where Pikmin can
be thrown over the edge; this may be fun, but try to avoid it.  Pikmin may go
over if they are thrown onto a flying beast that moves outwards, away from the
platform, and then is brought down, killing it and the Pikmin on it.  Also, if
eggs are broken near an edge, pools of Nectar and concentrated Ultra-spicy- or
Ultra-bitter Spray can spill over.  Finally, if a flying beast, usually a
Withering- or Puffy Blowhog, contains a treasure and is killed over the edge of
a platform, the treasure falls down over the edge, then re-appears over the
platform making collection possible.
_______________________________________________________________________________

There is, actually, one more beast for 4 of the categories above: one that
emits fire, water, poison and electricity - the final boss, Titan Dweevil.

The treasures mentioned above that make Olimar and Louie resistant to certain
ones of the hazards can all be found under section 4.4.3.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.1.2. Carrying items and producing Pikmin
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When carrying items, the amount of Pikmin required is determined by the weight
of the item.  When an item has any number of Pikmin attempting to carry it, 2
numbers are displayed, one above the other.  The bottom one is the weight of
the item, while the uppermost one is the combined strength of the Pikmin
carrying it, Purple Pikmin being worth 10 and all other colours and Bulbmin
worth 1.  Beasts weigh 1 to 20, pellets 1 to 20 and treasures 1 to 1000.  In
order to lift a treasure, the top number must be equal to or greater than the
one below it.

The colour of the numbers indicate various things.  When not enough Pikmin are
carrying the item to move it, the numbers are grey.  Something being carried
underground with enough Pikmin on it has white numbers.  Above ground, the
number indicates the colour of Onion that is the item's destination; this can
change if the Pikmin carrying the item are removed or others added. When an
item in such a situation is carried, the majority of Red, Yellow or Blue Pikmin
decides its destination; when there are no Red, Yellow or Blue Pikmin or they
are in equal proportions, where it will go is randomised with each Pikmin
added.

When putting Pikmin on an item to carry it, use A repeatedly if you wish a
certain number of Pikmin to carry it, or C or X if you wish as many as
possible to do so.

Every item that can be carried also has a maximum number of Pikmin that can
carry it.  This is a maximum number of Pikmin, and not a maximum combined
strength of those Pikmin.  It is usually double the weight of the object.

Pellet Posies, enemies and Candypop Buds are the only methods by which Pikmin
can be produced.  Beasts produce, generally, about as many Pikmin as their
weight.  Using all Candypop Buds but Queen Candypop Buds, Pikmin cannot be
created, but only changed in colour up to a maximum of 5.  Queen Candypop Buds
can only receive one Pikmin, but release 9.  (See 4.6.2 for more information.)

When carrying Pellet Posies' pellets, the colour indicates the Onion it will
most benefit.  When returned to the Onion of its own colour, it will produce
more Pikmin, a certain number that is determined by the pellet's number.  For
example, 1-pellets will produce 2 Pikmin at their own colour Onion and 1 at any
other; 5-pellets make 5 or 3; 10-pellets make 10 or 5.

When Pikmin return any item to the rocket, an Onion or, underground, the
Research Pod, they will avoid water if they are not immune to it, but no other
hazards.  They will run right into electricity, beasts, poison, fire and
anything else.  Pikmin will never walk off the edge of an underground area to
their death, however, unless commanded by use of C, if such an un-bordered edge
exists.

At the start of the game, all the Pellet Posies are red.  The only colour of
Pellet Posy that can be seen, without counting those situated where the
Onions of Blue and Yellow Pikmin are first encountered, are those colours of
Pikmin that you have so far collected.  The Pellet Posies where the Blue Onion
is found are always blue and those where the Yellow Onion is first found are
always yellow, but all others change, once every few seconds, between the
colours of the Pikmin that have been collected, in the order red, yellow, blue.
Pellet Posies' pellets cannot ever be purple or white, or aid in producing
Purple or White Pikmin directly.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.1.3. Tips
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here are the many advanced tips and techniques that I could come up with that
are not explained in the game's manual.  Some are common sense, and others are
not so obvious.  Of course, a number of them are just pointless.

(One thing that is very important, especially when above ground: split
Olimar and Louie/the President up and send them to different parts of the
level.  Nothing else can so increase efficiency.)

1. When entering a cave above ground, only the Pikmin with the Captain(s)
entering will go in; all other (not planted) Pikmin, whether they are doing
work, are idle or are with the other Captain, will go into their respective
Onion or the rocket.

2. When entering a cave to the next sublevel underground, or attempting to
exit a cave via a geyser, all Pikmin in the cave, except those planted in the
ground, will come.

3. When throwing Pikmin, run before and during pressing A to throw them
further.

4. White, Blue and Red Pikmin are thrown in the same way; Yellow and Purple
Pikmin have different weights and so are released at different angles.  Purple
Pikmin are heavy and so cannot be thrown as high: they have a low release
angle.  Yellow Pikmin are light and so can be thrown higher: they have a high
release angle.  So, Purple Pikmin can only be thrown up onto a ledge if the
Captain is a fair distance from it, as otherwise they will hit the side of the
ledge and fail to surmount it.

5. If you are running to a treasure to put Pikmin on it and their speed is not
as great as yours, hold A while running to carry one to the destination.  This
works best with purples because they are the slowest and can often carry a
treasure alone.

6. Only Yellow Pikmin can be thrown over gates that have not been pulled down
at all; however, do not attempt this with a poison gate, as they will be beyond
any hope of rescue.

7. Pikmin have enough time in water to stay alive that they can move a short
distance in it.  This can be used to take non-blue Pikmin across smaller
bodies of water, or further when combined with tip 3.

8. Shearwigs and Male- and Female Sheargrubs eat bridges that have been built.
This behaviour is also shared by Cloaking Burrow-nits.

9. Whenever a bridge's building is completed, a gate is fully demolished or an
area of water is drained, a characteristic 'completion sound' is heard.  This
can help in telling you when something is done, therefore meaning that there
is no need to check it every few seconds, which wastes precious time.

10. Pikmin's ghosts are thin, with 2 arms, a body and a pointed head.  They
retain the colour of the Pikmin they once were, and purple ghosts are wider
than others.  When one appears, it is informing you that a Pikmin has died, and
telling you which type.  The colour is helpful when, for example, it is vital
that a Purple Pikmin does not die as you need it to, for example, obtain a
certain treasure; without checking what Pikmin remain, you know it is time to
reset when a purple ghost appears.  They can be differentiated from beasts'
ghosts by the shape: all beasts' ghosts are round, white and wobbly, though
they differ in size depending upon the size of the beast.

11. The best cave in the game to use to re-stock on Purple Pikmin is
Subterranean Complex, in the Valley of Repose.  Take just one Red, Blue or
Yellow Pikmin and you can emerge with 2 more Red, Blue or Yellow Pikmin and
15 purple ones.  This is done by skipping all sublevels until the one upon
which no beasts, many eggs, 2 Queen Candypop Buds, 3 Violet Candypop Buds
and an exit geyser reside, by going to the hole on each one, passing treasures
and enemies.  Here, throw the Pikmin into one of the Queen Candypop Buds and
one of those returned into the other.  You will have 17 Pikmin.  Throw 15 into
the 3 Violet Candypop Buds, flower them with the eggs and, possibly, gain some
sprays.  Finally, exit by the geyser.  This can be repeated many times a day.

12. Most beasts (not Sheargrubs), once defeated, remain absent from the area
the next time it is visited.  They return, generally, after 1 day of this
non-presence.  In caves, beasts are never not there, even if the cave is
visited twice in one day.

13. Concentrated doses of purple (Ultra-bitter) or red (Ultra-spicy) sprays can
be exploited to give 2 sprays each.  Firstly, you must press X, ridding the
Captain of all Pikmin and, most importantly, the other Captain (note: you must
have both Captains conscious for this feat).  Move close to the spray, though
not as much as to suck it up.  Next, switch Captains and move close again.
Carefully, so as not to slip and get the spray, push the first Captain into it.
When he begins to drink it, quickly run into it with the second Captain, and
your spray count on the left of the screen will rise by 2.  This is best done
in caves, where there is no time limit as to how long is taken on anything.

14. There is no point, any time and any place, waiting for planted Pikmin to
grow buds, or even flowers.  The process is simply too time-consuming for it
to be of any importance.  Much more easily, all areas contain eggs, grass or
rubble where Nectar is present, and there are usually eggs present in sublevels
underground near Candypop Buds of any sort.  You may, of course, feel that the
time is not lost underground; but time taken throughout the game is counted and
recorded in the High Scores menu - and I'm sure you would prefer a faster
completion time than flowery Pikmin.

15. Taking beasts back to the Research Pod in underground areas does not help
progress the game at all, unless you have not yet reached 10,000 Pokos; even
then it does little to help you reach that total.  They are only converted into
treasure, the maximum for any one beast being 15 Pokos, some worth just a
single Poko.

16. Most sublevel layouts change randomly.  The beasts, treasures and eggs
move, and the contents of eggs change.  The actual ground shape may be
different as well.  Some sublevels, particularly boss-containing ones, never
change.

17. Even without the Treasure Gauge, you can tell when you have collected all
treasures on the current sublevel by the characteristic sound that plays after
the collection of the last one.  Of course, this does not help in identifying
whether a sublevel contains any treasures at all.

18. It is useful to know that pressing and holding B, X and Start for a second
will reset the game.

19. You can choose Pikmin to take with you, i.e. make them not idle, by either
whistling or touching them when idle.  Touching is useful for selecting just a
few Pikmin.

20. When holding A, as well as pressing left and right on the D-Pad to choose
the colour of Pikmin being used, you can press up and down on it to choose
whether it is a leaf, bud or flower.

21. Some beasts in certain places in caves can be defeated without any
fighting.  It is done by allowing a beast to try to catch you, your Pikmin or
both, then running around a hole or gap in the stage.  Beasts with long legs
that can step over barriers (for example, Gatling Groinks or Spotty Bulbears),
will somehow manage to forget about the opening's existence and fall down it,
to their deaths.

22. In many situations, it is better to use one of the Pikmin Captains to
attack beasts, rather than Pikmin.  This applies especially once certain
treasures from the Exploration Kit have been collected: those that make the
Captains resistant to a hazard, the one that reduces damage done to them and
the one that allows an extra, third, more powerful punch when attacking.
Alternatively to attacking, you could make the beasts attack each other with
careful evasion.  Those beasts that can harm others include Gatling Groinks,
Armored Cannon Beetle Larvae and Decorated Cannon Beetles.

23. Pikmin can be asked to perform a task such as attacking, demolishing or
building in three ways.  The first is by pressing A and throwing the Pikmin
near or onto the area in which the task is to be carried out.  The second is by
using C, to swarm the Pikmin to the area.  The third is by making the Pikmin
become idle, by pressing X; when Pikmin are idle, they will perform nearby
tasks that they could do - so watch groups of idle Pikmin carefully, or call
them to your side by whistling to keep them out of trouble.

24. When Pikmin are taken out of their Onions or the rocket, they are taken out
in a specific order: first, flower-topped Pikmin emerge, followed by those with
buds and, finally, leaves.  When ordering any Pikmin back into an Onion or the
rocket, they return in no particular order, usually the closest first.

25. On all days except day 1, there is a timer on top of the screen.  The sun
picture starts at the far left.  When it reaches the far right, the day is
over.  Over the course of a day, 3 sounds will play at certain times.  Two, of
similar volume, pitch and timbre, will play at 1 and 3 quarters through the
day.  Another, which is louder and lower, will play at Noon, signifying that
half of the day is over already.

26. At sunset, if a treasure has been carried to a certain point in the level,
it remains there until the next day.  From my experience, this is untrue in
only one case: if the treasure was left where mold grows (see Items and
Obstacles, below), in which case it returns to where it started.  The dead
bodies of beasts, when left, do not remain; perhaps they are scavenged by
hungry beasts overnight.

27. There are two ways to rescue a drowning non-blue Pikmin from water.  The
first is, as with poison and fire, to whistle them; however, they will come
towards you, so make sure you are on land before whistling.  The second is to
throw a Blue Pikmin near it.  The Blue Pikmin will grab the drowning one, carry
it to a certain distance away from any land, then proceed to throw it onto
land.  Surprisingly, the Blue Pikmin are very powerful, and can throw a long
distance, though not any great height.

28. When a beast has been paralysed and is encased in rock, it will disappear
when killed (only if it is still in this state at the time of death).  This
means that there will be no body, which, in some cases can help, as the
creature will not, as can occur with some enemies, come back to life.  Also, it
will yield Nectar or pools of Ultra-bitter/Ultra-spicy Spray as an added bonus.

29. Some beasts, once defeated, regain their life bar.  The beast will be
'reborn' once the bar is full.  One example is with Spotty Bulbears.  To remedy
this, you must return it to the Research Pod, exit the cave or go down a
sublevel before it comes back to life, or you will have to fight it again
(possibly).  On the other hand, as in the tip above (28), you can defeat it
while immobilised by the use of a helping of Ultra-bitter Spray, which will
make the body disappear.

30. As you know, R changes the distance of the camera from the Captain.  But
also, if the button is held for a second or two and kept depressed, the screen
will show a low angle, comparable to the Captain's view.  This has little
practical use, but is an interesting detail that allows you to pay extra
attention to those carefully-created worlds.

31. In caves, if a treasure is being taken back to the Research Pod and there
is nothing left to do, wait by the exit geyser or next entrance, so as to save
time after it is returned.

32. When the ship is delivering one of its boring monologues, you can speed up
the text by pressing A or make it all appear with B.  Even better, press Start
as the cutscene begins for some of these to skip them altogether.

33. A lot of people don't know that to return to the title screen from the
area selection screen, press Start to bring up the menu.  Strangely, B does
nothing.

34. It's generally easiest to play with the camera fully zoomed-out.

35. Planted Pikmin, as you probably know, turn from leaves to buds to flowers
after a certain period of time; however, be aware that they will wilt again
after further waiting, regressing to their leaf-topped forms.

36. When Pikmin carrying objects are sprayed with Ultra-spicy spray, they move
with it as quickly as flower-topped Pikmin do normally, despite what's
currently on their head.  This makes spraying flower Pikmin in this case
unnecessary.

37. When sprayed with Ultra-spicy spray, Pikmin carrying objects do not slow
back down to normal speed until they stop doing so, even if the effect appears
to wear off.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.1.4. Items and obstacles
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The following are the items in Pikmin 2:

See section 4.1.2 for Pellet Posies and 4.6.2 for Candypop Buds.

Burgeoning Spiderworts are the plants that grow berries, red or purple.  They
grow 5 each, 3 or 4 times each Pikmin day.  The berries, when returned to the
rocket, make up a spray for each 10 collected, red berries for Ultra-spicy
Spray, purple for Ultra-bitter Spray.  These are used by pressing up or down on
the D-Pad.  Ravenous Whiskerpillars are beasts that are, as the name suggests,
ever-hungry; they like to eat the berries.  Beasts of this species are easily
conquered, but cannot be killed.

The Ultra-spicy Spray is used by pressing down on the D-Pad.  It causes the
Pikmin with the Captain at the time to be sprayed and their leaves, buds or
flowers become a red glow.  It is best to use with a large group of Pikmin,
when preparing to defeat a particularly strong boss, or another beast with
limited Pikmin.  The spray lasts for approximately 40 seconds, perfectly timed
to last throughout most boss battles if used well.

The Ultra-bitter Spray is used by pressing up on the D-Pad.  It causes the
Captain to spray it out in front of him, coating any beasts within a certain
range in that direction with rock and consequently paralysing them.  When used,
it is best done at a time when you will be able to attack quickly, as only an
8-second gap of Pikmin death-free attack is given.  This spray does not
extinguish Fiery Bulblaxes' flames, however.  You can paralyse multiple enemies
at once by moving as you spray, seeing as the spray is continuously expelled
for almost a second.

The sprays can be obtained in two ways: either by collecting 10 of the
appropriately-coloured berries, or a single concentrated spray of the same
colour.  This looks like a pool of goo and can be found in eggs, Honeywisps,
Unmarked Spectralids, Iridescent Flint Beetles and Doodlebugs, and also other
beasts if killed while paralysed (by use of an Ultra-bitter Spray).

Eggs can be found in a great variety of places, most often underground, most
often near Candypop Buds.  They hold one of a number of things, which is chosen
at random.  Inside, there could be one or two pools of Nectar, a pool of
Ultra-spicy Spray or Ultra-bitter Spray, or a swarm of Mitites, which release a
pool of Nectar each, sometimes spray, if killed (use a Purple Pikmin for best
effect).

Nectar is found in Honeywisps, Doodlebugs, Iridescent Flint Beetles, long
grass, patches of rubble and eggs, and resembles a yellow pool of goo.  It can
also be found inside enemies that were coated in rock (i.e. you used
Ultra-bitter Spray on them) at their time of death.  It turns the leaf or bud
on Pikmin's heads into a flower when they drink it.  In order to gain the
maximum amount of flowers possible out of a pool, make sure you have all the
non-flowered Pikmin possible with you, then proceed to march them into the
Nectar with C.  Pass them over it several times to make sure they all drink
from it.

Explosions are caused by bomb rocks, which are spherical though roughly-shaped
rocks that have yellow cracks across the surface.  They have a life meter that
diminishes only once the rock has landed, been hit using A, or set off by a
Pikmin, Careening Dirigibug or Volatile Dweevil, the latter 2 of which carry
them.  The rock pulses, swells, emits beams of light and, finally, explodes,
KILLING ANY PIKMIN INSTANTLY and harming Captains within a set range.  They can
fall from the sky in some caves, be carried by Volatile Dweevils or Careening
Dirigibugs, or be lying still, ready to be disturbed on the ground; in some
places they can be used to kill enemies.
(copied from Hazards section (4.1.1))

Although they are not in the Piklopedia, swarms of orange bugs can be found
crawling around on the floor in Wistful Wild on days 31, 61, 91, 121, and so
on.  They are very small, and can be considered items in that they are not
actually beasts.  When swarmed with Pikmin, they release vast amounts of pools
of Nectar, Ultra-bitter Spray and Ultra-spicy Spray; but beware them, as they
may also poison any attacking Pikmin.  There are 2 groups, which are to be
found one around the Hole of Heroes' entrance and the other in an alcove near
there.  There is, however, a maximum amount of pools of spray and Nectar that
can exist at once, which is the only reason the amount does not increase
near-infinitely.

Finally, long grass and rubble.  They are similar in what they do; the only
difference between them is appearance and the sound they make when used.  They
are found above ground only, and there is no need to set Pikmin to work on
them.  The reason for this is simple: Pikmin love them!  They will start
attacking the grass or rocks as they pass them, and it can be hard to stop the
Pikmin.  The result is several pools of Nectar, which your Pikmin will greedily
drink if they are not already flowers.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Next are descriptions of non-living obstacles, excluding hazards, found in the
game:

Gates are common both above ground and under it.  They come in many varieties.

White gates: the most common type of gate, and found in all sorts of places.
They are broken down in 3 stages by putting Pikmin at work on their
destruction.  Once demolished above ground, they never return; those
underground are always back up when the sublevel is revisited.

Black gates: these are, in principle, the same as white gates.  They are holed
and, of course, black.  The only difference in how they affect play is that
they are stronger and take slightly longer to get rid of.

Electric fences: yellow gates that have a totally different design.  They are
made up of 2 posts, between which what looks like copper wire is concertinaed
vertically and tightly.  An electric current runs through the wire and sparks
in warning; non-yellow Pikmin are killed and Anti-electrifierless Captains hurt
upon contact with the gate.  They are destroyed in the same way as other gates,
but only with Yellow Pikmin.  This type of gate is found above ground only.

Poison gates: normal gates, in either black or white varieties, but with poison
pipes underneath.  Because the pipes cannot be destroyed until the gate itself
has been, this particular type of gate must be demolished with White Pikmin.
As with electric fences, these are only found above ground.

Bridges are, when you first see them, neat piles of wood to the side of a body
of water.  Set Pikmin on to a pile (in some cases, you may have to cross the
water with Blue Pikmin and then use them to build it for other colours of
Pikmin to cross) using C, X or A.  They will begin to prepare then, near the
end of the entire process, actually build it.

Poison bridges are a variation of the common bridge; alternatively, these have
poison pipes underneath which, can only be seen and, thus, broken, after the
actual building of the bridge has begun.  So, as with poison gates, you must
use White Pikmin to build them.

In large bodies of water above ground, plugs are often found.  Due to their
being submerged, Blue Pikmin must be used.  Simply swarm one with C and the
Pikmin will start to bash it; wait, and it will have been replaced by a hole.
A short cutscene will show the area that you have drained by removing it.
These also cover some underground sublevels' caves to the next level down, and
some exit geysers, as well as the entrance to Shower Room.

Paper bags are located in certain above-ground places.  They must be compressed
to the ground by the weight of Pikmin in order to allow you to walk across and
into the area beyond.  They come with varying weight requirements, including
one of 35 and one of 200.  There are few in the game.

Areas of mold are another obstacle.  They appear where Burgeoning Spiderworts
are, and they suck the life out of the soil so the Burgeoning Spiderworts
cannot grow.  However, once attacked by Pikmin, the molds release air, reduce
in size, then pop - to disappear into thin air, as if they never were.  Then,
surprisingly quickly, the Burgeoning Spiderworts return.

Finally, there are the sets of double- and quad-blocks.  These are blocks of
wood that are balanced, their position decided by the weight on them.  They are
used to reach high-up places.  The double-blocks are relatively easy to
understand: the block with a greater total weight on it (of Pikmin only; it
appears that Captains weigh nothing) is the lower and the block with less on it
is the higher.  The best way to pass by them quickly is to use Purple Pikmin.
If you have more time, throw one Pikmin of any colour onto the higher block,
and then the rest up onto the ledge.  Walk onto the ledge and whistle them when
the block you are standing on rises.

There is only one set of quad-blocks in the game, in Perplexing Pool - which is
simply 4 blocks in a row that are balanced, though they are linked in a more
complicated way.

(copied from below: section 4.4.2.3)
Each of the blocks is in a pair, and the pairs are alternate amongst them.
                                 Each of the two pairs acts like a set of
 +++++   +++++   +++++   +++++   double-blocks, though the two lower and two
+ one + +     + +     + +four +  higher ones are not exactly the same height.
+     + + two + +three+ +     +
 +++++   +++++   +++++   +++++
    \_     |      _/       /     In the diagram, the (physically) higher
      \-Pair one-/      __/ numbers are higher blocks, the lower ones lower
           |           /    blocks.  You want to get onto the far left block
           |-Pair two-/     and raise it.  So, begin by leaving all of the
Pikmin with one Captain and getting to block 1 with the other.  As the blocks
progress to the left, their height grows, even though each has 2 height levels.
The only block low enough for a Captain to walk onto from the floor, then, is
block 4, as it is the lowest of all at its low position.

So, you need to lower the block by throwing 1 Pikmin on it: you will notice
that its pair, block 2, will be the one to rise.  Walk onto block 4.  Next, you
need to raise block 4 to be able to walk onto block 3 - due to the mundane fact
that neither Captain can jump - which is done by throwing 2 Pikmin onto its
pair, block 2 (to weigh more than the 1 on block 4 already).  To get onto block
2, you must raise block 3, by throwing one Pikmin onto its pair, block 1.
Finally, to get onto the final block, block 1, you must raise block 2, by
whistling the 2 Pikmin on it, thereby leaving the 1 on block 4 to outweigh the
0 on block 2 and so cause it to rise.

To make the block you are now on rise, throw 2 Pikmin onto block 3, to outweigh
the 1 on block 1.  You can throw the rest of the Pikmin needed up there just on
the left hand side, straight onto the moss-covered stone there.

Finally, with the Captain on the blocks, whistle the 20+ Pikmin and take them
forwards, where the treasure can be seen; throw the Pikmin onto its ledge in
order to collect it.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.2. Discovering the Pikmin
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To collect every single treasure, each colour of Pikmin must be found.  This
section describes where and how this can be done, and how to do it quickly and
with ease, for each of the 5 colours: red, purple, white, yellow and blue; and
Bulbmin. Because of the requirements for each one, they must be collected in
that order (except Bulbmin, which it is not necessary to find to complete the
game).

Purple and White Pikmin can only be found in caves and produced by throwing
other-coloured Pikmin into the correct Candypop Bud, and they sleep in the
rocket; Red, Yellow and Blue Pikmin are found with their Onions, and sleep in
them.  Bulbmin can only be found underground, but cannot leave their
subterranean home.  They are the rarest, and the larger variety is listed in
the Piklopedia.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.2.1. Red Pikmin
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Red Pikmin are those first discovered.  They are resistant to fire, be it
from vents in the ground or beasts, and are the strongest of the Pikmin except
for purples - because, if you look closely, you can see that they have long
pointed noses.

They are located in the first area Olimar and Louie land in, the Valley of
Repose.  It is not hard to find the first 5 because the rocket points them out
before you are given any control but that to scroll through text.  You must
'save' them (It is actually impossible to lose any Pikmin on the first day.
I've tried.) from the creature they are, undoubtedly, terrorising - a Dwarf Red
Bulborb.

To get the only other Red Pikmin available without doing any work, you must
switch to Louie and walk up the slope.  The Red Onion there ejects a red seed,
which is planted and grows up to have a leaf that protrudes from the ground;
Louie must pick it for the sixth and final 'free' Red Pikmin.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.2.2. Purple Pikmin
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

These are found underground.  They are the largest and slowest of the 6 Pikmin
types but, helpfully, 10 times as strong and 10 times as heavy as any other
Pikmin.  This means that they can carry a value of 10 of the weight of treasure
and beasts, can compress paper bags 10 times as easily, and perform other tasks
a bit more quickly and kill enemies faster and more efficiently.  Also, on top
of that, they have the ability to momentarily stun most enemies when thrown on
top of or near them - so you can attack without fear of Pikmin loss for a
certain period of time.  All of this makes them, beyond doubt, the best type of
Pikmin to use in most any battle.

Another point to take note of when using Purple Pikmin is their angle of throw:
when released, their great weight causes the throw to be at a low angle.  So,
they cannot be thrown up onto a ledge when near it: you must stand a distance
away to allow them to get up.  Purple Pikmin are also unaffected by things that
cause other Pikmin to run around in a seemingly confused manner.  This includes
Mitites and an Emperor Bulblax's roar.  This stretches to the attacks of the
flying Blowhogs too: blown air.  Finally, they have a limited 'homing' ability:
throw them in the general direction of smaller beasts, though still quite
accurately, and they will aim towards the beast in mid-air, often for an
immediate kill.

Violet Candypop Buds can be found for the first time in the Valley of Repose.
You must venture underground, via the entrance to the first cave, Emergence
Cave.  To get to the entrance, you must first compress the bag to the right of
the area outside the base, for which 35 Red Pikmin are required.  Next, head
across the clearing and break down the gate across it, on the right.  Through
the opening is the cave's mouth.

After going down a floor, you will be at the final sublevel, which is equally
as easy to complete as the first: navigate around the corner to the left and
kill the Snow Bulborbs on the way.  Then, go through the arch and do what the
Research Pod hints at - throw 5 Red Pikmin into each of the two Violet Candypop
Buds.  Afterwards, pick the Pikmin that are planted and you will have 10 Purple
Pikmin.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.2.3. White Pikmin
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

White Pikmin have many good qualities.  Firstly, they are the fastest colour of
Pikmin, due to their being the smallest - with flowers, they can outrun Olimar
and Louie (though are the same speed once Repugnant Appendage has been
collected).  Secondly, they are resistant to poison (a billowing purple gas).
Thirdly, they harm enemies when consumed, as they contain poison themselves.
And, on top of all of that, their large, red, odd-looking eyes allow them to
see buried treasures that cannot be obtained by any other method than with
White Pikmin.

The Awakening Wood is the first location of these Pikmin.  Whites are expelled
from Ivory Candypop Buds, for which you need to visit the White Flower Garden;
this is located behind a paper bag which, to compress, requires the weight of
200 Pikmin.  So, to get the amount of Purple Pikmin needed, you probably need
to complete another cave first: Hole of Beasts.  See section 4.3.4 for the
completion of this cave.

Proceed to remove enough Purple Pikmin from the rocket if any are still in
there, then follow the route to the Hole of Beasts, but do not turn left at the
Creeping Chrysanthemum.  Instead, go straight on past the junction, following
the curved path until you reach a paper bag blocking the route.  Compress it
with the twenty Purple Pikmin you (should have) brought along, and you can see
and enter the cave beyond.

Make your way down to the third sublevel, using section 4.3.5 if really
necessary, where are no hazards whatsoever.  The Ivory Candypop Buds are at the
end of the tunnel from the Research Pod's start, in the open area that follows;
there are 3 in all, meaning that 15 White Pikmin can be obtained. Throw some
Pikmin in and watch the seeds as they are sown and grown.  Pick them to collect
your first whites.

Here, their ability to see things underground is immediately put to the test,
when they begin to dig up a treasure in front of the passage to the end of the
sublevel.  You can also soup up the new recruits into flowers, by causing the
floating Honeywisp nearby to drop its egg, releasing Nectar; this is done by
hitting the creature with a thrown Pikmin.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.2.4. Yellow Pikmin
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The next colour to be collected is yellow.  These have large ears - which
actually has nothing to do with their abilities - and are slimmer than Red and
Blue Pikmin, which leads to their being the lightest of all colours.  This, in
turn, means that they can be thrown the highest, to reach high treasures.  It
can also create some problems: the trajectory with which they land is
different, making a difference to where in the flight they will hit the top of
a Pellet Posy; aim must be changed for this type of Pikmin in such situations.
The second ability Yellow Pikmin have is that of electrical resistance - that
is, they remain unaffected by electricity, be it on gates, from beasts or
as a beam blocking your path.  However, they can no longer pick up and carry
about bomb rocks, which they could do in the first game.

Yellow Pikmin are found nearby their matching-coloured Onion in Perplexing
Pool.  Begin at the start and remove up to 50 Red, 5 to 10 Purple and 15 - or,
preferably, more - White Pikmin.  Exit the enclosed area you begin in and head
to the left of the large tree stump ahead.  There is a Yellow Wollywog on the
path: before it has a chance to jump upwards, throw some Purple Pikmin on its
back.  It should end up temporarily paralysed and die without attacking.  There
is no further use for many more purples on this expedition, so you could order
some to take the Yellow Wollywog back to the Red Onion.

Continue along the same route until there is water to the left and a circular
wall ahead.  To the right, there should be a set of double-blocks.  Walk onto
the lower one and stand a small distance from the higher, so as to account for
the low-angled throw trajectories of Purple Pikmin.  Throw one of the purples
you have onto the block above, then proceed to throw the rest of your Pikmin up
onto the grassy ledge.  The block you are on should rise, making you level with
the ledge.

Walk onto the ledge, leaving the purple behind and whistling the group of
other Pikmin already up there.  Continue forwards, to stop to the left of a
Fiery Bulblax.  If you want to use an Ultra-spicy Spray for the upcoming
battle, use it now; proceed, then, to disband the Pikmin and select the reds;
throw them rapidly on the Fiery Bulblax's back.  It should die quickly and with
no Pikmin eaten.  Leave the Red Pikmin behind and choose the whites now, taking
them to the white poison gate beyond the Fiery Bulblax and setting them to work
on it.

While that is being taken care of, use the time to do something constructive:
for example, collect some purple berries from the Burgeoning Spiderworts close
by, build the bridge near those, defeat some beasts  - or just wander around a
bit, taking in the scenery.

Return to the labouring whites to relieve them once the gate has been
destroyed, then put 9 on the Pellet Posy that requires 10 to carry its pellet,
and 4 on the one that requires 5.  Now turn to the right and, from up in the
branches of a tree, whistle down the 5 Yellow Pikmin that are resting there.
Now you can easily gain more by throwing just one onto each Pellet Posy.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.2.5. Blue Pikmin
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The final variety of Pikmin to be found is blue: these are lacking in
abilities, only being able to survive in water.  However, this is possibly the
best substance to which to have a resistance, seeing as vast areas of the game
are covered by it, and several black gates are submerged.  Blue Pikmin are the
only ones to have visible mouths, which are pink in colour.

There are two ways to rescue a drowning non-blue Pikmin from water.  The first
is, as with poison and fire, to whistle them; however, they will come towards
you, so make sure you are on land before whistling.  The second is to throw a
Blue Pikmin near it.  The Blue Pikmin will grab the drowning one, carry it to a
certain distance away from any land, then proceed to throw it onto land.
Surprisingly, the Blue Pikmin are very powerful, and can throw a long distance,
though not any great height.

These Pikmin are the second kind to be found at the Awakening Wood.  To find
them, Yellow Pikmin are needed; to get yellows, reds and whites are required;
for whites, you need purples; and the discovery of purples involves Red Pikmin.
Thus, Blue Pikmin must be found last.

They are behind an electric fence, so take as many yellows as possible, but not
so many as to affect the amount of Pikmin that can be put to work on your other
plans during that day.  I recommend that you use 30 or more, as fewer will take
a long time to raze the gate.

With the Pikmin, head to the right of the starting area, past the two red
Burgeoning Spiderworts, through the gate (which must by now have been
demolished) and onwards.  If the Cloaking Burrow-nit has returned (or was never
defeated originally) swarm it with C.  Next, go forth to turn to the left of
the compressed paper bag and up to the ledge ahead.  Throw all of your Pikmin
up, but to the left so as to avoid their being eaten by the Cloaking Burrow-nit
on the right.

Once that is done, head to the right and around the rock sporting a dandelion,
where there is a narrow path of water.  Walk past the Cloaking Burrow-nit,
ignoring its movement, to whistle the Yellow Pikmin.  Use C to bring them
quickly towards you and the beast and, hopefully, none should be harmed in
killing it.  You should be able to see the electric fence (if not, I don't
think I can help you) and set the Pikmin to work at breaking it down.

As at other similar times, I stress the fact that you would do well now to do
something else with the other Captain.  Collect more sprays, treasures or
Pikmin while the work is going on, or turn some into flower-topped ones via
puddles of Nectar.  When a 'completion' sound is heard, you know the gate is
gone.

Next, press X to make sure you take no Yellow Pikmin into the pool ahead of
you.  Walk in and, upon sighting the 5 available Blue Pikmin that are attacking
some Wogpoles, whistle them to get a close-up of one and the ship's first
thoughts of them.  In the area are 5 Pellet Posies with a weight of 1, one with
a weight of 5, and a treasure.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.2.6. Bulbmin
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bulbmin are almost Pikmin; according to Olimar they are a parasitic variation
that lives its entire life inside a Bulborb host body.  They have, therefore,
some of the Pikmin's obedience to Olimar and Louie, in that they carry out
their every command at youth, but fully-grown members of the species act more
as Bulborbs do.  They resemble Red Bulborbs, though are smaller even at full
size, the size of young ones being in a similar ratio to that of Dwarf Red
Bulborbs.

The only distinguishing factor by which to figure out that they are not
Bulborbs but in fact Bulbmin is the leaf, bud or flower on their backs.  These
act as Pikmin's do, indicating the creature's current capabilities with regard
to speed and strength.

These beasts are found in caves, though rarely in great numbers; they are also
given for some of the challenges in Challenge Mode.  Always found in groups
with an adult leading up to 10 young, the adult must be defeated in order to
allow you to use the others as you do Pikmin.  The size of the group depends
upon how many Pikmin you have brought into the cave with you, because the
total number can never exceed 100.  For example, if you have 99, there will
only be one smaller Bulbmin; if you already have 100, there will only be the
larger one.  The maximum amount that can ever be present with one larger member
of the species is 10, though in some sublevels more than one group can be
found.  Once commandeered, it is found that they are, like Bulborbs, resistant
to poison, fire, water and electricity, and are quite as strong and as fast as
the average Pikmin.  The only downside to using them is their size: they have
more trouble navigating tight bends or narrow tunnels than Pikmin.

Bulbmin have no Onion, and do not rest in the rocket.  This can be explained
by the fact that they cannot leave caves.  There is, seemingly, no reason for
this - perhaps, simply, they prefer to stay at home.  Because of this, when
they are found, it makes perfect sense that they should be the first type to be
thrown into Candypop Buds.

The locations at which Bulbmin can be found are as follows:
- Frontier Cavern, sublevel 3 x1 group
- Frontier Cavern, sublevel 6 x1 group
- Submerged Castle, sublevel 2 x1 group
- Submerged Castle, sublevel 3 x1 group
- Submerged Castle, sublevel 4 x2 groups
- Hole of Heroes, sublevel 8 x1 group

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.3. Areas
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are 4 areas in which the rocket can land in Pikmin 2.  They are, in the
order normally visited, Valley of Repose, Awakening Wood, Perplexing Pool and
Wistful Wild.  Here, I will explain how to get to each area, and what is in it.
This includes their hazards, treasures, caves, obstacles, items and Pikmin
discovered.  Where I list these, they are by location, so separate groups of
enemies are listed separately.

Also, apart from those beasts listed, there are usually a few Ravenous
Whiskerpillars to be found near Burgeoning Spiderworts at times, but only where
mold grows.  These are found only in the presence of two or more Burgeoning
Spiderworts in one place, which occurs just thrice in the game, once in each
area but the Valley of Repose.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.3.1. Valley of Repose
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is the first place that the rocket lands on when the planet of the Pikmin
is encountered in this game.  It represents Winter and is, therefore, covered
with snow.  The main area, though snowless, is bordered with snowy mounds, and
snowflakes of all sizes can be seen falling.

NOTES

Day 1: much of this area is restricted, and there are several differences.
There is a Dwarf Red Bulborb in the landing area, the Red Onion is near where
Louie begins and there are fewer Pellet Posies around the landing site.  Also,
looking into the distance reveals that all beasts except the Red Bulborb and
Dwarf Red Bulborb in the arena-like area past the paper bag are still there.

Days 1 and 2: the few Pellet Posies where the Red Onion is on day 1 are there
only on these days, and the eggs behind the rocket are absent.

Until Blue Pikmin are found: the Burrowing Snagret does not exist.

INFORMATION

Hazards:
- pool of water x3                       (1 can be drained, 1 can be bridged)
- Dwarf Red Bulborb x1                   (day 1 only)
- Dwarf Red Bulborb x1                   (not days
- Red Bulborb x1                          1 and 2)
- Burrowing Snagret x1                   (after Blue Pikmin found)
- Water Dumple x2
- Water Dumple x3
- Decorated Cannon Beetle x2
- Cloaking Burrow-nit x1
- Fiery Blowhog x2
- Fiery Bulblax x1
- Watery Blowhog x1
- Honeywisp x1
- Withering Blowhog x1
- Armored Cannon Beetle Larva x1

Items and Obstacles:
- egg x3                                 (not days 1 and 2)
- Pellet Posy weight 1 x4
- Pellet Posy weight 5 x3
- Pellet Posy weight 10 x1
- Pellet Posy weight 1 x5                (days 1 and 2 only)
- paper bag x2, weight 15 and 35
- white gate x1
- white gate x1
- white poison gate x1
- bridge x1

Caves:
- Emergence Cave
- Subterranean Complex
- Frontier Cavern

Treasures:
- #008 Spiny Alien Treat
- #044 Fossilized Ursidae
- #063 Utter Scrap
- #086 Temporal Mechanism
- #109 Unspeakable Wonder
- #114 Pink Menace
- #157 Courage Reactor

New Pikmin:
- Red Onion found
- First Violet Candypop Buds found

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.3.2. Awakening Wood
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is the second area to be found in Pikmin 2.  All the time, blossom petals
are falling, and so we can interpret it as representing Spring.  To get there,
one must collect treasure number 184, called Spherical Atlas.  The area is
bordered with high ledges and covered in plants, earth and grass.  It features
two lakes and three smaller pools of water.

NOTES

After Blue Pikmin are found: the Pellet Posies in the area where the Blue Onion
was found disappear.

After debt repayment (I think...): 3 10-weight Pellet Posies and one of weight
20 appear near the landing site.

After a few days (~6): there is a red Burgeoning Spiderwort near the landing
area.

INFORMATION

Hazards:
- pool of water x5                       (1 can be drained, 2 can be bridged)
- Dwarf Red Bulborb x2
- Red Bulborb x1
- Honeywisp x1
- Unmarked Spectralids x2 groups
- Iridescent Flint Beetle x1
- Honeywisp x1
- Female Sheargrubs x2 groups
- Cloaking Burrow-nit x1
- Creeping Chrysanthemum x1
- Cloaking Burrow-nit x1
- Cloaking Burrow-nit x1
- Wogpole x3
- Male Sheargrubs x1 group
- Female Sheargrubs x1 group
- Yellow Wollywog x2
- Burrowing Snagret x1
- Creeping Chrysanthemum x1

Items and Obstacles:
- long grass x1
- Pellet Posy weight 1 x10
- Pellet Posy weight 10 x3               (after debt
- Pellet Posy weight 20 x1                repayment)
- Burgeoning Spiderwort x1 (red)         (after day 10)
- Burgeoning Spiderwort x2 (red)
- white gate x1
- paper bag x1, weight 200
- white poison gate x1
- white poison gate x1
- set of double-blocks x1
- electric fence x1
- Pellet Posy weight 1 x5                (before collecting
- Pellet Posy weight 5 x1                 Blue Pikmin)
- Burgeoning Spiderwort x1 (purple)
- electric fence x1
- set of double-blocks x1
- white gate x1

Caves:
- Hole of Beasts
- White Flower Garden
- Bulblax Kingdom
- Snagret Hole

Treasures:
- #002 Sunseed Berry
- #018 Pilgrim Bulb
- #064 Decorative Goo
- #137 Air Brake
- #144 Chance Totem
- #177 Hypnotic Platter
- #185 Geographic Projection

New Pikmin:
- First Ivory Candypop Buds found
- Blue Onion found

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.3.3. Perplexing Pool
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Perplexing Pool's lighting and large amount of water are what show it to be a
representation of either early or late Summer.  To get there, the Geographic
Projection must be collected from Awakening Wood.  Perplexing Pool is the
wettest area, with a large pool, a medium-sized pool, a few smaller ones, a
lake that wraps itself around most of the area, and a deep, water-filled,
ceramic hole in the ground.  A line of hollow tree-trunk stumps effectively
separates the level into two halves.

NOTES

After Yellow Pikmin are found: the Pellet Posies and Fiery Bulblax near the
original location of the Yellow Onion disappear.

~Day 30+: a Beady Long Legs will appear just past the Onions; it reappears
every few days, depending on whether it is killed or not.  It appears when a
Captain walks over the centre of the white ring on the ground.

~Day 30+: a Spotty Bulbear and 3 Dwarf Bulbears will patrol the area near the
Fiery Blowhog, but can follow you across most of the level.  The Dwarf Bulbears
replace the two normally along the path to the left as you leave the Onions.

Sometimes: the Yellow Wollywog near the Citadel of Spiders is replaced by a
group of Shearwigs.  It may randomly occur after about day 14, or after
repayment of the debt.

INFORMATION

Hazards:
- pool of water x 7             (2 can be drained (together), 2 can be bridged)
- Shearwigs x2 groups
- Spotty Bulbear x1                      (after
- Dwarf Bulbear x3                        day
- Beady Long Legs x1                      30)
- Shearwigs x2
- Skitter Leaf x3
- Water Dumple x3
- Dwarf Bulbear x2                       (x3 after day 30)
- Honeywisp x1
- Yellow Wollywog x1                     (This is replaced with
- Shearwigs, x1 group                     this, sometimes)
- Skitter Leaf x1
- Skitter Leaf x1
- Hermit Crawmad x2
- Water Dumple x2
- Withering Blowhog x1
- Fiery Bulblax x1                       (before collecting Yellow Pikmin)
- Swooping Snitchbug x1
- Swooping Snitchbug x1
- Fiery Blowhog x1
- Toady Bloyster x1
- Yellow Wollywog x2
- Wogpole x5
- Yellow Wollywog x1
- Water Dumple x2

Items and Obstacles:
- rubble x1
- white gate x1
- Burgeoning Spiderwort x1 (red)
- egg x2
- electric fence x2
- set of double-blocks x1
- black gate x1
- set of quad-blocks x1
- rubble x1
- egg x3
- white poison gate x1
- Pellet Posy weight 10 x1               (until
- Pellet Posy weight 5 x1                 collection of
- Pellet Posy weight 1 x3                 Yellow Pikmin)
- Burgeoning Spiderwort x2 (purple)
- electric fence x1
- long grass x1
- black gate x1

Caves:
- Citadel of Spiders
- Glutton's Kitchen
- Shower Room
- Submerged Castle

Treasures:
- #016 Onion Replica
- #048 Fortified Delicacy
- #074 Impediment Scourge
- #099 Massage Girdle
- #136 Aquatic Mine
- #175 Gherkin Gate
- #179 Abstract Masterpiece

New Pikmin:
- Yellow Onion found

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.3.4. Wistful Wild
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Wistful Wild is based around the season Autumn, with its red-brown leaves
falling down the screen.  Two lakes and little grass also help create the
season.  After collecting 10,000 Pokos, this area will be available to land in.
There are some strange rusted metal structures here and there, while trees,
branches and odd-looking forms high above cast shadows on the dead, brown
ground.

NOTES

Days 31, 61, 91...: there are small orange bugs crawling around on the floor in
2 swarms.  One is found around the Hole of Heroes and the other just across the
plain from that first group.

INFORMATION

Hazards:
- pool of water x2                       (1 can be bridged, 1 can be drained)
- Dwarf Red Bulborb x2
- Hermit Crawmad x1
- Decorated Cannon Beetle x1
- Swooping Snitchbug x1
- Dwarf Red Bulborb x3
- Yellow Wollywog x1
- Cloaking Burrow-nit x1
- Fiery Blowhog x1
- Gatling Groink x1
- Orange Bulborb x2
- Withering Blowhog x1
- Creeping Chrysanthemum x3
- Withering Blowhog x1
- Fiery Blowhog x1
- Watery Blowhog x1
- Shearwigs x1 group
- Armored Cannon Beetle Larva x1

Items and Obstacles:
- rubble x1
- white gate x1
- rubble x1
- egg x3
- black poison gate x1
- egg x4
- black poison gate x1
- electric fence x1
- Burgeoning Spiderwort x3 (random colours)
- egg x3

Caves:
- Cavern of Chaos
- Hole of Heroes
- Dream Den

Treasures:
- #004 Seed of Greed
- #013 Anti-hiccup Fungus
- #020 Conifer Spire
- #021 Armored Nut
- #135 Doomsday Apparatus

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4. Treasures
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is the main part of the guide: collecting all 201 treasures.  Includes
information on how to get every treasure and some tips throughout to minimise
Pikmin losses.

(Of course, if you are simply attempting to complete the game, and do not wish
to be adventurous and try to do it without the loss of any Pikmin, there is no
need to panic and reset if you lose only 1 or 2 Pikmin somewhere, especially on
a boss.)

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.1. Quick guide/walkthrough plan
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If you feel that a detailed guide is too long to read, or do not want so much
help, use the following alone as a rough outline of what to do to complete the
game, collecting every treasure.

Alternatively, this can be used alongside the guides for each treasure, as an
overall plan, describing which order to get them in, and what must be done to
allow each one's collection.  I will not go in detail with caves, as they
cannot be done in any order other than by sublevel, which is as per the guide
further below.  For in-depth guides, refer to sections 4.2, 4.4.2 and 4.4.3.

Each objective is numbered, and everything that must be done to complete that
is indented afterwards: each further indentation is a further objective.


Section One: Valley of Repose
Aim: collect Courage Reactor
- Courage Reactor

1.  Collect Courage Reactor
  1.  Gain 20 Pikmin
    1.  Compress paper bag (near landing area)
      1.  Gain 15 Pikmin


Section Two: Valley of Repose
Aim: collect Spherical Atlas to unlock Awakening Wood
- Utter Scrap
- Emergence Cave

1.  Collect Utter Scrap (across area with Red Bulborb in its centre)
  1.  Compress paper bag (to the right outside landing area)
    1.  Gain 35 Pikmin
2.  Complete Emergence Cave (past area with Red Bulborb in its centre)
  1.  Demolish white gate


Section Three: Awakening Wood
Aim: collect Geographic Projection to unlock Perplexing Pool
- Sunseed Berry, Geographic Projection, Pilgrim Bulb, Chance Totem
- Hole of Beasts, White Flower Garden

1.  Collect Sunseed Berry (on ledge in landing area)
2.  Complete Hole of Beasts
  1. Demolish white gate (past Burgeoning Spiderworts)
3.  Complete White Flower Garden
  1.  Compress paper bag (past demolished gate)
4.  Collect Geographic Projection
  1.  Demolish poison gate (near Hole of Beasts)
  2.  Build bridge
5.  Collect Pilgrim Bulb (buried in pots near landing area)
6.  Collect Chance Totem (on ledge past second poison gate)
  1.  Demolish poison gate (near White Flower Garden)


Section Four: Perplexing Pool
Aim: collect Yellow Pikmin, to be able to finish Awakening Wood
- Impediment Scourge, Gherkin Gate
- Citadel of Spiders, Glutton's Kitchen

1.  Collect Yellow Pikmin
  1.  Defeat Fiery Bulblax (down path then up double-blocks)
  2.  Demolish poison gate
2.  Complete Citadel of Spiders (just left from Onions)
3.  Collect Impediment Scourge (near Burgeoning Spiderworts)
4.  Complete Glutton's Kitchen
  1.  Demolish electric fence
5.  Collect Gherkin Gate (near Burgeoning Spiderworts)


Section Five: Awakening Wood
Aim: finish Awakening Wood
- Hypnotic Platter, Decorative Goo, Air Brake
- Bulblax Kingdom, Snagret Hole

1.  Collect Hypnotic Platter (on tree stump past Burgeoning Spiderworts)
2.  Collect Blue Pikmin
  1.  Destroy electric fence (near White Flower Garden)
3.  Collect Decorative Goo (near Blue Onion)
4.  Complete Bulblax Kingdom
  1.  Demolish electric fence (past purple Burgeoning Spiderwort)
5.  Collect Air Brake (on cliff above pool past Geographic Projection)
6.  Complete Snagret Hole
  1.  Build 2 bridges (at pool past Geographic Projection)


Section Six: Perplexing Pool
Aim: finish Perplexing Pool
- Abstract Masterpiece, Massage Girdle, Onion Replica, Aquatic Mine, Fortified
  Delicacy
- Submerged Castle, Shower Room

1.  Collect Abstract Masterpiece
  1.  Demolish electric fence (along long pool to the left)
2.  Complete Submerged Castle
  1.  Break down black gate (at end of long pool to the left)
3.  Collect Massage Girdle (near Submerged Castle)
4.  Collect Aquatic Mine
  1.  Defeat Toady Bloyster (behind landing area)
5.  Collect Fortified Delicacy
  1.  Demolish electric fence (behind landing area)
  2.  Destroy plug over Shower Room
  3.  Dig up treasure (far right corner from landing area)
6.  Complete Shower Room


Section Seven: Valley of Repose
Aim: finish Valley of Repose
- Spiny Alien Treat, Pink Menace, Fossilized Ursidae, Temporal Mechanism,
  Unspeakable Wonder
- Subterranean Complex, Frontier Cavern

1.  Collect Spiny Alien Treat (buried near lake near Emergence Cave)
2.  Collect Pink Menace (buried near lake near Emergence Cave)
3.  Collect Fossilized Ursidae (up high, left over bridge)
  1.  Demolish underwater gate (in lake near Emergence Cave)
  2.  Destroy plug
  3.  Build bridge
4.  Collect Temporal Mechanism
  1.  Defeat Fiery Bulblax (near Fossilized Ursidae)
5.  Complete Subterranean Complex
  1.  Demolish poison gate (right past the beasts)
6.  Collect Unspeakable Wonder (high up, near Frontier Cavern)
7.  Complete Frontier Cavern
  1.  Build bridge (at far end of level)


Section Eight: Wistful Wild
Aim: finish Wistful Wild
- Doomsday Apparatus, Conifer Spire, Armored Nut, Seed of Greed, Anti-hiccup
  Fungus
- Cavern of Chaos, Hole of Heroes, Dream Den

1.  Collect Doomsday Apparatus (just outside landing area)
2.  Complete Cavern of Chaos (just outside land area)
3.  Collect Conifer Spire
  1.  Demolish underwater gate (right from landing area)
  2.  Destroy plug
  3.  Demolish electric fence
4.  Complete Hole of Heroes (near Conifer Spire)
5.  Collect Armored Nut (in Creeping Chrysanthemum near Hole of Heroes)
6.  Collect Seed of Greed (in Orange Bulborb)
  1.  Build bridge (left, over lake)
  2.  Demolish poison gate
7.  Collect Anti-hiccup Fungus (near Seed of Greed)
8.  Complete Dream Den (near Anti-hiccup Fungus)

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.2. Overground
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here are listed the game's above ground treasures and how to collect them.
Obstacles that must be passed are included only in the first treasure where
that particular obstacle is encountered; after that, it is as if they have
already been destroyed or removed.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.2.1. Valley of Repose
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#157 Courage Reactor (Duracell D battery), 20 Pikmin, 280 Pokos.

To collect: 20 Pikmin

This can only be collected on the first day that you play; first, watch the
introduction, then listen to the ship.  After that, save the five Red Pikmin
from the terrifying Dwarf Red Bulborb and defeat it by throwing one on its
back.  It is impossible to lose any Pikmin here.  Next, press Y to switch to
Louie.  Walk up the slope to find a Red Onion, which is explained, as is the
Pikmin that it ejects.  Use it to collect the surrounding pellets, so that you
have enough Pikmin to crush the bag separating Olimar and Louie.  To speed up
collecting the pellets, throw the Pikmin onto the top, so it takes less time to
break the flower down first, and try to put 2 Pikmin onto each pellet where
possible.

After picking the Pikmin, walk along the path to the left, past the treasure,
and onwards to Olimar's rescue.  Put all of the Pikmin onto the bag to crumple
it, then take the dead Dwarf Red Bulborb back to the Onion, while tasking other
Pikmin to dig up the treasure.  Pick the new planted Pikmin, then, using all 20
gained so far, throw or swarm them onto the treasure, and wait for it to be
returned to the rocket.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#063 Utter Scrap (Crushed drinks can), 35 Pikmin, 170 Pokos.

To find: 35 Pikmin
To collect: 35 Pikmin

This is found beyond a paper bag barring the way to the rest of the level,
which requires a weight of 35 on it to be compressed.  With the amount of
Pikmin needed, obtained from Pellet Posies all around the first part of the
Valley of Repose, pass through.

Defeat the Dwarf Red Bulborb with a Pikmin or two.  It is advisable to get rid
of the large, ferocious-looking Red Bulborb in the centre before collecting the
treasure, which is to the left at the far end, as the Pikmin often move about
randomly when carrying treasure.  To do this as safely as possible, throw
Pikmin onto the beast's back from behind as rapidly as possible.  Next, simply
get Pikmin to carry the treasure back to the rocket.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#008 Spiny Alien Treat (Plant bulb or bud of some kind), 4 Pikmin, 50 Pokos.

To collect: White Pikmin

Begin by throwing 4 to 8 White Pikmin on the ledge where the 10-weight Pellet
Posy appears, then walk around the right side as you exit the landing site,
over the Bulborb's arena, through the gate, past Emergence Cave and through the
pool.  Go right to find the Pikmin.

Take the Pikmin around the pool's edge and wander around to find the buried
treasure.  Get them all to start digging and they will, after a while, return
the treasure to the rocket.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#114 Pink Menace (Gold ring with pink heart), 5 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

To collect: White Pikmin

Throw very few Pikmin, a maximum of 5 and at least one White Pikmin, preferably
1 white and 1 purple only, up the ledge where the 10-weight Pellet Posy is.
Walk around the right side as you exit the landing site, past the Bulborbs
which are there if they have reappeared, and through the pool.  Go right to
find the Pikmin.

Take the Pikmin up the steep slope to the left.  On the way up, a Burrowing
Snagret will appear; ignore it and take your Pikmin past.  Walk until your
White Pikmin begins to dig, at which point you should disband all the Pikmin
and quickly leave.  If the Snagret has unfortunately appeared near the
treasure, however, walk back and try again.  The treasure should be returned to
the ship without any injuries...in theory.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#044 Fossilized Ursidae (Small wooden carving of a bear), 25 Pikmin, 160 Pokos.

To find: Blue Pikmin
To collect: Yellow Pikmin

With many Blue Pikmin and 30 or so yellows, walk around past Emergence Cave.
If the Red Bulborb and Dwarf Red Bulborb before it have returned, take some
Purple Pikmin (no more than 10 are needed) to defeat them.

Lead the Blue Pikmin into the water and order them to demolish the white gate
under some snow.  (While this is happening, collect some other treasure, such
as Spiny Alien Treat and Pink Menace, or breed some more Pikmin.)  After their
work is complete, take them left through the water on the other side, defeating
the Water Dumples if you need to, and back around to the bridge above.  It is
quite easy to avoid the beasts up here for now, which you can start to defeat
yourself once the blues are safely building the bridge.  Once that is complete,
you should take both blues and yellows past the beasts, only needing to kill
the far Decorated Cannon Beetle, and press X at the lake just past it.

Take the Yellow Pikmin straight on, past that lake on the right, and walk up
the gentler slope in the wall.  At the top, throw them all onto the indented
slope above, at which they will slide left to the treasure.  Once 25 of them
have hold of it, they will begin carrying it back to the rocket.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#086 Temporal Mechanism ('Nintendo' pocket clock), 30 Pikmin, 110 Pokos.

To find: Blue Pikmin
To collect: Blue Pikmin

With many Blue Pikmin, walk around past Emergence Cave.  Take them over the
bridge from before, to the left, and defeat the Water Dumples in the water
there, before approaching Fiery Bulblax on the other side.  I really recommend
using an Ultra-bitter Spray here, as otherwise the process of defeating the
beast is long and painful (for the Pikmin that will get eaten), and leaves its
body behind.

Throw a single Blue Pikmin onto the Bulblax's back and whistle it from the
flames it erupts into immediately.  Stay close to but far from the Bulblax - so
that it cannot eat any Pikmin, but follows you into the water.  Once it is
partially submerged, its flames will become extinguished and it is time to
spray it and throw Blue Pikmin on top quickly to release the treasure.  Return
it to the ship.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#109 Unspeakable Wonder (Golden crown), 30 Pikmin, 120 Pokos.

To find: Blue Pikmin

Purple Pikmin are the most useful for this treasure because of the difficult
battle involved, and the heavy treasure.  After the Blue Pikmin have done all
of what is required to collect Fossilized Ursidae, take about 10 Purple Pikmin
over the bridge.  Defeat all the beasts there by throwing the Pikmin onto each
in turn, and then continue forwards.  Defeat the Watery Blowhog on the right in
the same manner and then the Withering Blowhog ahead as well, being careful not
to lose your Pikmin's flowers (they'll need them).

If you go up the slope to the right of the massive crown-wearing snowman, a
large Armored Cannon Beetle will appear at the top, which is a dominating
position.  Stay right until it begins to unleash a boulder, then throw a Pikmin
on it before it moves at all - the purpose of this is to keep the beast aiming
down that side of the slope.  Walk up the left side with the rest of the Pikmin
and then attack, whistling them back up the slope each time they fall down.  It
seems to be impossible to stun these beasts when they remain half underground
like this, so be careful -  it will not be an easy fight.

With the Armored Cannon Beetle Larva dead, throw the Pikmin up to the crown,
which is the treasure.  Unfortunately, the way that it is placed makes this
hard, and the Pikmin will often get stuck even if they do manage to take hold
of it.  Your best bet is to throw them up on the side nearest the Onions and
the rest of Valley of Repose, and they should return it to the rocket, if very
very slowly.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.2.2. Awakening Wood
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#002 Sunseed Berry (Strawberry with leaves), 5 Pikmin, 170 Pokos.

From the Onions, go forwards.  There are 3 Dwarf Red Bulborbs and a Red Bulborb
that must be killed before this treasure can be safely brought back to the
rocket; although easiest and quickest with purples, 35 reds quickly thrown onto
the larger enemies back should kill it.

The treasure is on the ledge behind the Red Bulborb, at the edge, near a wall.
Simply throw a single Purple Pikmin or five of another type up there to bring
it down and return it to the ship.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#185 Geographic Projection (Southern hemisphere of a globe), 101 Pikmin, 200
     Pokos.

To find: White Pikmin
To collect: Purple Pikmin

Turn right sharply from the Onions, with at least 10 Purple Pikmin, many whites
and some reds as well.  Go to the white gate ahead which must be destroyed, if
not done already, and swarm it with all of the Pikmin.  Then swarm the
Cloaking Burrow-nit past it and turn left, wary of the hidden Creeping
Chrysanthemum blocking your path.  To defeat it, wake it up, throw Purple
Pikmin on to paralyse the beast, then swarm it with C.

Now turn left again, to come face to face with a poison gate.  Throw all of
your White Pikmin onto it so they begin destroying.  To spend time, it is best,
now, to go and collect another treasure (only Sunseed Berry at this point) or
produce more Pikmin.  Another thing that could be done that is useful is
collecting red berries for Ultra-spicy Sprays.  Go through the poison gate once
it's gone.

Ahead is a Creeping Chrysanthemum buried in the earth; use purples, as before,
to stun it when it emerges, then swarm.  Turning left, build a bridge out of
the pile of wood there by swarming Pikmin onto it; while that task is being
carried out, turn to the treasure and throw a Pikmin onto it for the cutscene,
so that something is still happening while you don't move.  The treasure will
have been dug up by that one Pikmin by the time the bridge is built.  Once the
latter is complete, providing a quicker path for the treasure to go to the
rocket, as it is a heavy and, so, slow one to carry, swarm all of your Pikmin
onto it, for maximum speed.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#018 Pilgrim Bulb (Plant bulb), 10 Pikmin, 55 Pokos.

To collect: White Pikmin

With a number of White Pikmin, go to the pots in the first area of Awakening
Wood, forwards from the ship.  Go around them, and up the ramp against the
wall, to the lower pot's top.  From there, throw the White Pikmin up onto the
top of the other, higher pot.  They will spot a treasure under the soil with
their keen red eyes, and proceed to dig it up.  Then they will take it to the
rocket for value estimation and treasure evaluation.

If your White Pikmin are tied up in other back-breaking labour, this is easily
done using one white and a purple; although it will take longer, there's no
need to keep track of them, and more White Pikmin are free to demolish those
two poison gates.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#144 Chance Totem (Ordinary die), 15 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

To find: White Pikmin

Starting, take the sharp right through the white gate at the start with at
least 20 Purple Pikmin and as many, though preferably more, white ones.  Defeat
both Cloaking Burrow-nit and Creeping Chrysanthemum, both by swarming them,
then turn right, to find the path blocked by a paper bag.  This, as it requires
a combined weight of 200 Pikmin, can be removed by your 20+ purples.

Through there, use your White Pikmin to break down the poison gate ahead, which
can take some time - so do something else while waiting, such as producing more
Red Pikmin.  Once it is gone, proceed through and onwards, to the set of
double-blocks; throw all of your Pikmin except one onto the ledge above, then,
walking onto the lower block, throw that one onto the higher block.  You will
rise, so walk forwards onto the ledge, whistle the Pikmin up there, and
continue.

Alternatively, if you have Blue Pikmin, you could go behind the Onions to where
a small pool of water lies, drain it by ordering them to attack the plug, then
demolish the white gate with any other Pikmin, opening up a shortcut to where
you are now.

Take the right turn to where the Burgeoning Spiderwort bearing purple
(Ultra-bitter) berries resides.  Turn to the ledge on the left, and throw 2 to
3 Purple Pikmin onto the treasure which is balanced precariously up there.
Only 2 purples are needed, or 15 or more of another colour; I suggest that the
White Pikmin carry it, in favour of their speed.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#177 Hypnotic Platter ('Vita-malz' bottle cap), 4 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

To collect: Yellow Pikmin (also possible with a purple)

With 4 to 8 Yellow Pikmin, turn right from the Onions, past the now-demolished
black gate, and defeat the Cloaking Burrow-nit if required.  Turn right to face
the tree stump and throw the Yellow Pikmin up there to collect the treasure.
Alternatively, this can be accomplished with a Purple Pikmin: run up one of the
roots that stretches downwards and outwards from the stump while holding A, and
release the button at the top.  This may take a few tries, but is useful for
collecting Hypnotic Platter before you are supposed to - while waiting for the
path to Geographic Projection to be opened up, for example.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#064 Decorative Goo (Small tube of blue 'Mario Paints'), 10 Pikmin, 80 Pokos.

To find: Yellow Pikmin
To collect: Blue Pikmin

You will need Yellow Pikmin if you have not found the Blue Pikmin yet, and if
you found the Blue Pikmin on a previous day, you will need to bring 12 or more
of those along.  Begin by turning right from the rocket, past the Burgeoning
Spiderworts.  Continue forwards to the ledge ahead and throw any Pikmin you
have brought that are not water-resistant  up onto the far left-hand side, at a
safe distance from the buried beast on the right.  Walk round to the right and
through the water, whistling the Pikmin and using them to swarm the Cloaking
Burrow-nit if it is there.  Order Yellow Pikmin to raze the electric fence if
need be.

Walk into the pool and whistle the Blue Pikmin if you have not previously done
so; propagate more of them with the Pellet Posies there, perhaps collecting the
Cloaking Burrow-nit's body as well, to be able to carry the treasure that is in
the far corner, on the patch of blue-stained land there.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#137 Air Brake (Shuttlecock), 15 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

To find: White Pikmin
To collect: Blue Pikmin

Begin by taking at least 16 Blue Pikmin, 30 for best speed, across the starting
area and to the right, over the bridge.  If the bridge has been eaten by mean
Sheargrubs, turn right straight away and make your way around, past the two
Creeping Chrysanthemums and onwards.

Continue along the path that is left at the other side of  the bridge to find a
lake with two bridges and two Yellow Wollywogs; I advise defeating the
Wollywogs before building the bridges, as they cause Pikmin squishedness
whether the midgets are working or not.  For this treasure alone, however, no
bridge construction is required; take ONLY Blue Pikmin into the water, where
you will find a set of double-blocks.

These are separated, so separate your Captains to deal with them separately.
Begin by walking onto the rightmost block, as you enter the pool, with just a
Captain; then, throw half of your blues, rounded up, onto the other block.
Throw the rest to the Captain, who should now be high up and remain so, and get
him to whistle them and throw them up to the treasure on the cliff above.
Whistle all the Pikmin on the lower block with the Captain in the water and
repeat until there are enough Pikmin on the treasure to carry it.

If you have 16 Pikmin, you will have to repeat a further 3 times, but with 30
or more, just the once is enough.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.2.3. Perplexing Pool
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#074 Impediment Scourge (Wooden-handled bottle opener), 10 Pikmin, 50 Pokos.

To collect: Yellow Pikmin

Take 10 or more Yellow Pikmin to collect this.  Make your way over the bridge
to the right as you leave the Onions (it should have already been built from
the other side).  Be careful of the Shearwigs that may be buried around that
area, swarming them if necessary.  If the bridge has been destroyed or never
built, go around the left side instead, make your way to the double-blocks,
manipulate them, continue forwards and then take a right past the entrance to
the original location of the Yellow Onion.

Once over, go around the tall tree stump next to the massive one (the small one
that you can see the treasure on) and, from the higher stone ground between the
two stumps, throw the Yellow Pikmin up to collect it.  If you want to use the
yellows for something else, you can save time by switching them for a purple or
two once the treasure has been brought down.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#175 Gherkin Gate ('Vlasic' jar lid), 15 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

To collect: Yellow Pikmin

With between 15 and 25 yellows, make your way over the bridge the the right as
you leave the Onions (it should have already been built from the other side),
again being wary of the possibility of Shearwig attacks.

Go to the left of the rectangular ledges on the right (as viewed from the
Yellow Onion's original location).  Walk up the moss-covered slope, making sure
that EVERY Pikmin stays on; those that fall off will die in the water.  Walk
around this path that goes around the inner edge of the structure until you see
the treasure up high.  After throwing up enough Yellow Pikmin, walk off to the
right.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#179 Abstract Masterpiece (Blue 'PscHitt!' bottle cap), 4 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

To find: Yellow Pikmin (supposedly Blue Pikmin too)
To collect: Blue Pikmin

With a number of Blue and Yellow Pikmin, walk alongside the lake that runs down
the left side of Perplexing Pool.  After a while, you will come to a Yellow
Wollywog near a bridge that has not yet been built, which will allow water-weak
Pikmin to get across the lake.

Build the bridge with Blue Pikmin, probably after defeating the Yellow Wollywog
first, and take the yellows across, which you should throw over the grey wall
on the other side.  Whistle them from this side then walk around through the
water and use the C-stick to get them to attack the electric fence there.  Once
this is complete, you can collect the treasure with 4 or more Blue Pikmin.

Alternatively, you can destroy the electric fence without the need for Blue
Pikmin.  Take the yellows to perform the task around to the set of
double-blocks, turn and proceed to throw them over the electric gate one at a
time, lengthening throw distance as per tip 3 (section 4.1.3): hold A and
release while running in the direction of the throw.  If any fall short,
whistle them back and try again.  Finish by whistling them from this side and
swarming them onto the gate.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#099 Massage Girdle (Nut [mechanical] with a base), 20 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

To find: Blue Pikmin
To collect: Blue Pikmin

Walk all the way up the left hand side of the level, demolish the black gate
in the water and defeat beasts there if needed.  You can only use Blue Pikmin
to collect this treasure, of which I recommend about 30, or more if the beasts
are not yet defeated and the gate not broken down.

Make your way to the set of quad-blocks in clear view just to the right.  The
treasure is high up on the left, for which you will need to manipulate them.
Each of the blocks is in a pair, and the pairs are alternate amongst them.
                                 Each of the two pairs acts like a set of
 +++++   +++++   +++++   +++++   double-blocks, though the two lower and two
+ one + +     + +     + +four +  higher ones are not exactly the same height.
+     + + two + +three+ +     +
 +++++   +++++   +++++   +++++
    \_     |      _/       /     In the diagram, the (physically) higher
      \-Pair one-/      __/ numbers are higher blocks, the lower ones lower
           |           /    blocks.  You want to get onto the far left block
           |-Pair two-/     and raise it.  So, begin by leaving all of the
Pikmin with one Captain and getting to block 1 with the other.  As the blocks
progress to the left, their height grows, even though each has 2 height levels.
The only block low enough for a Captain to walk onto from the floor, then, is
block 4, as it is the lowest of all at its low position.

So, you need to lower the block by throwing 1 Pikmin on it: you will notice
that its pair, block 2, will be the one to rise.  Walk onto block 4.  Next, you
need to raise block 4 to be able to walk onto block 3 - due to the mundane fact
that neither Captain can jump - which is done by throwing 2 Pikmin onto its
pair, block 2 (to weigh more than the 1 on block 4 already).  To get onto block
2, you must raise block 3, by throwing one Pikmin onto its pair, block 1.
Finally, to get onto the final block, block 1, you must raise block 2, by
whistling the 2 Pikmin on it, thereby leaving the 1 on block 4 to outweigh the
0 on block 2 and so cause it to rise.

To make the block you are now on rise, throw 2 Pikmin onto block 3, to outweigh
the 1 on block 1.  You can throw the rest of the Pikmin needed up there just on
the left hand side, straight onto the moss-covered stone there.

Finally, with the Captain on the blocks, whistle the 20+ Pikmin and take them
forwards, where the treasure can be seen; throw the Pikmin onto its ledge in
order to collect it.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#016 Onion Replica (Brown onion), 20 Pikmin, 30 Pokos.

To find: Blue Pikmin
To collect: White Pikmin, Blue Pikmin

Take a lot of Blue Pikmin, as many as you can spare, around the left side as
you leave the Onions.  Defeat the Water Dumples there by swarming or throwing
(the former's quicker, the latter's safer) and begin breaking down the gate.
On the other side is a medium-sized pool.

Defeat the Yellow Wollywog just past the black gate before progressing, most
easily achieved by swarming it and then doing nothing (don't whistle Pikmin it
throws away or they could die).  Next, throw 5 or so White Pikmin up onto the
lowered part of the stone wall at the back of the landing site with the Captain
up there.  Collect these with the Captain on the other, lower side and walk to
the part of the land furthest into the pool, where they will find a buried
treasure.

When the treasure is visible, remove the whites and throw them back up to the
Onions, replacing them at work on the treasure with at least 20 Blue Pikmin,
preferably more.  The treasure will be carried the way you did not come from,
so defeat the Water Dumples and Yellow Wollywogs in its route quickly, or stop
the treasure if you take too long.  It will eventually find its way back to the
rocket.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#136 Aquatic Mine (Yellow, orange and bomb-shaped thing), 3 Pikmin, 80 Pokos.

Either - To find: Blue Pikmin
         To collect: Blue Pikmin
or     - To find: Yellow Pikmin, Blue Pikmin

It is your choice whether you drain the lake before collecting this or not; if
you choose not, take only Blue Pikmin.  Either way, there is no need for more
than 15 Pikmin of any colour.  Begin by turning right out of the landing area,
and walk into the water (if still there).

(To drain the lake, take a fair number of yellows to that lake, and walk them
carefully along the narrow path around the left hand side, putting them to work
on the electric fence across it.  When that task is complete, walk into the
area behind with some Blue Pikmin and attack the rock-covered cave entrance,
which will open up Shower Room for entry and drain all the water nearby.)

Make your way forwards, up to the Toady Bloyster, which is easy to defeat.
Stay behind it and throw Pikmin onto its bud-like thing dangling down - it is
hard to aim at this well, though.  Use a close view and press Z so that the
camera angle is from directly above, then move the purple aiming reticule so
that it is over the bud, standing a bit back yourself.  Then throw.  The beast
is very weak and won't sustain much Pikmin-whacking, and you should be able to
collect its treasure before long.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#048 Fortified Delicacy (Sea creature's shell), 20 Pikmin, 60 Pokos.

To find: Yellow Pikmin, Blue Pikmin
To collect: White Pikmin

Firstly, you will need to drain the lake.  Do this by demolishing the electric
fence near Shower Room (around the right hand side of the Onions' area, across
the precarious path on the left) with Yellow Pikmin, and then destroying the
plug over the cave with Blue Pikmin.  With that complete, take White Pikmin
(and others if you have fewer than 25 of those) around to the now-drained tiled
area.

Walk across the dull-coloured floor, defeating the two Yellow Wollywogs, and
search for the treasure in the far corner using the Treasure Gauge.  Once White
Pikmin have dug it up, return it to the rocket.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.2.4. Wistful Wild
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#135 Doomsday Apparatus (Blue dumbbell), 1000 Pikmin, 3000 Pokos.

To collect: 100 Purple Pikmin

The main problem with this one is building up the number of purples in the
first place.  There are 19 Violet Candypops available in the game, producing 95
purples, so it is required that you revisit at least one cave.  I suggest
Subterranean Complex, for which you can refer to tip 11 (section 4.1.3):

The best cave in the game to use to re-stock on Purple Pikmin is Subterranean
Complex, in the Valley of Repose.  Take just one Red, Blue or Yellow Pikmin and
you can emerge with 2 more Red, Blue or Yellow Pikmin and 15 purple ones.  This
is done by skipping all sublevels until the one upon which no beasts, many
eggs, 2 Queen Candypop Buds, 3 Violet Candypop Buds and an exit geyser reside,
by going to the hole on each one, passing treasures and enemies.  Here, throw
the Pikmin into one of the Queen Candypop Buds and one of those returned into
the other.  You will have 17 Pikmin.  Throw 15 into the 3 Violet Candypop Buds,
flower them with the eggs and, possibly, gain some sprays.  Finally, exit by
the geyser.  This can be repeated many times a day.

With those 100 Purple Pikmin, leave the landing area, defeat the Dwarf Red
Bulborbs in an instant with your immense power, use the rubble nearby for those
all-important flowers, and swarm them all onto the treasure to the right.  They
take about a quarter of a day to return it, so defeat as many beasts with
Captains alone as you can while they're at it.  You can kill the Decorated
Cannon Beetle and Gatling Groink with the Cannon Beetle's boulders - but be
sure that the Groink is petrified when killed so that the body disappears.
The Dwarf Red Bulborbs, Hermit Crawmad and possibly the Cloaking Burrow-nit
over the water are all viable targets.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#020 Conifer Spire (Pine cone), 7 Pikmin, 15 Pokos.

To find: Blue Pikmin, Yellow Pikmin

With perhaps 35 Blue Pikmin and as many yellows, walk past the Doomsday
Apparatus and along the rusted metal chute along the right wall.  Leave the
yellows on land, defeat the Hermit Crawmad and demolish the white gate in the
water.  Through there, walk over to the left and task your blues to the
destruction of the plug in the pool there.  Switching Captains, take the Yellow
Pikmin across the field and swarm them onto the electric fence at the other
end, avoiding the beasts.

While this is happening, it's a good idea to defeat all the creatures in that
area, so that the treasure can be taken back without fault.  Use purples,
preferably, perhaps destroying the molds and collecting some berries too.  On
the other side of the gate, use your Pikmin to dispose of the Armored Cannon
Beetle Larva, throwing them on constantly and whistling from one side to avoid
its attacks.  Just past this enemy is the treasure, which can now be safely
collected.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#021 Armored Nut (Acorn), 4 Pikmin, 60 Pokos.

To find: Blue Pikmin

There is a choice of routes here, and either can be taken depending on which
has already been cleared of obstacles.  You can either go the way of the
Conifer Spire, then walk up the long path made by a length of bamboo, past the
Hole of Heroes and onto the field; or you can go up the ramp as you leave the
landing area, across the bridge there, around to the right and onto the field.
If you have not cleared these paths of obstacles, refer to the treasures
directly above and below this for the two separate methods.

You are likely to find the collection of this treasure easiest with Purple
Pikmin, though any will suffice.  Bring quite a few along, and defeat the
Creeping Chrysanthemum that contains the treasure (check beforehand which it is
by use of the Treasure Gauge).  Do this by throwing Pikmin onto it rapidly
after it has awoken, whistling them quickly as it starts to bite or shake.

It is also required to kill any other of the Creeping Chrysanthemums that wake
up and are in the path of the treasure, and any of the Withering Blowhogs that
decide to slow everything down.
_______________________________________________________________________________

#004 Seed of Greed (Chestnut), 10 Pikmin, 70 Pokos.

To find: Blue Pikmin, White Pikmin

Remove from the Onions and rocket a fair number of blues and as many whites as
you can muster without affecting your other plans of the day, along with enough
purples to stay safe from enemies.  Take a left as you leave, walking up the
ramp, quickly taking out the Gatling Groink if it is there by attacking with
thrown Purple Pikmin.  You should return the body of this beast to an Onion to
ensure that it does not revive - it's best to use some of the purples for this.

Continue around the bend and separate your Pikmin, whistling the blues and
leading them over the other side to set them at work on the pile of wood there.
Avoid the Cloaking Burrow-nit and Blowhog if you can, quickly swarming if they
decide to attack.  With the bridge built, take your whites over to start
destroying the black poison gate; in the time taken, it is recommended that you
take your Purple Pikmin over to the right, around the border of the tree stump,
and defeat all the Creeping Chrysanthemums and Withering Blowhogs in the open
area beyond.

Through the gate, you will have to fight the Orange Bulborbs with the Withering
Blowhog hovering about above.  To keep it clean and quick, use the purples of
course, and wait until the Blowhog is on the other side before attacking the
first Bulborb.  Repeat, defeat the flying creature, and task some White Pikmin
(for greatest speed) to the collection of the treasure extracted from one of
the Orange Bulborbs.

_______________________________________________________________________________

#013 Anti-hiccup Fungus (Fungus), 5 Pikmin, 30 Pokos.

To find: Blue Pikmin, White Pikmin

For this one, follow the route for Seed of Greed (treasure above this one),
then head onwards to the cave there (Dream Den).  Turn to the left and you'll
see this tucked into the corner there.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.3. Underground
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is the section for walkthroughs through caves.  They are organised as you
go down, by sublevel.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.3.1. Emergence Cave
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Location: Valley of Repose
To find: 35 Pikmin

Starting from the Onions, walk out and go right; from there, break down the
white gate at the far right corner of the area to find the cave.  Only Red
Pikmin can be brought in here when first explored, and few are required, but
bring more than 20 so that the treasures can be carried quickly.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 1

#007 Citrus Lump (Squashed orange), 15 Pikmin, 180 Pokos.
#182 Quenching Emblem ('7up' white and red bottle cap), 4 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

Simply go through into the second room and kill each Snow Bulborb with a thrown
Red Pikmin or, if you cannot aim well, by swarming them all at once.  Then,
pick up the two treasures, neglecting to return the beasts, thereby saving
precious time.  The entrance to sublevel 2 is in that second room.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 2

#184 Spherical Atlas (Northern hemisphere of a globe), 101 Pikmin, 200 Pokos.

Defeat all of the Snow Bulborbs along the path to the last room that contains
two Violet Candypop Buds; throw 10 Red Pikmin in and get 10 purple ones out.
Return, with all, to the start, where the treasure was pointed out by the
rocket.  Return it to the Research Pod.  It is a good idea not to collect the
Spherical Atlas, as it ends the day automatically; instead, exit after picking
the 10 Purple Pikmin, then, outside, produce more reds from the Pellet Posies
(which should have regrown), re-entering the cave afterwards.  This way, you
can get almost 30 more Red Pikmin, and 10 more purples.

The exit geyser is located within the small wooden hollow at the end of the
room containing the Candypop Buds.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.3.2. Subterranean Complex
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Location: Valley of Repose
To find: Blue Pikmin, White Pikmin

Go past Emergence Cave, turn left and walk over the bridge with White Pikmin.
If this has not been built, it is necessary to destroy the black gate in the
water with Blue Pikmin, drain the lake by attacking the plug and make your way
around the other side to build the bridge.  Past the beasts, turn right and
demolish the white poison gate there to find the entrance to the cave behind
it.  There is also a Honeywisp there, which you can use for Nectar or a spray.
You will need to take a number of Yellow, Red, Purple and White Pikmin in; 20
of each is enough.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 1

#093 Nouveau Table (Telephone dial ring), 25 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.
#101 Exhausted Superstick (Near-empty roll of 'Gamma Tape'), 12 Pikmin, 50
     Pokos.

There's snow here, and many white-coloured Bulborbs, both small and large
types.  Poison pipes block access in places, and there is a Bumbling Snitchbug
ready to grab the Captains.  To defeat any Snow Bulborbs not near a larger
Hairy Bulborb, swarm them or throw a Pikmin on the back; otherwise, throw
Purple Pikmin on the big one and then the smaller ones.  The Bumbling
Snitchbugs can be easily brought down to the ground by attacking with Pikmin.

The treasures are either partially or completely buried, which requires White
Pikmin.  If the cave has a poison pipe in front of it, simply dismiss all
Pikmin before entering it, and they will still follow.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 2

#090 Network Mainbrain (Processor), 10 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.
#095 Spirit Flogger (Cog), 20 Pikmin, 70 Pokos.

The snow is gone, the platform is floating and metallic, and bomb rocks are
everywhere.  It's a good idea to take a Captain out to explore alone first of
all, setting off all the bomb rocks on the ground and triggering the falling
ones.

To defeat the 4 beasts, take a small squad of Pikmin, preferably fast ones, and
throw them at the Careening Dirigibugs first, each in turn.  Attack, and the
bomb rock should fall a fair distance away where it won't harm any Pikmin;
retreat if it is too near.  If the beast gets a chance to get back up, whistle
the Pikmin off so that they won't be thrown off an edge.  The remaining
Swooping Snitchbug should pose no problems.

With the dangers gone, collect the two treasures, both of them easy to find.
Find the cave and continue on down.  Watch out for falling bomb rocks near the
treasures.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 3

#094 Omega Flywheel (Cog), 20 Pikmin, 60 Pokos.
#096 Superstrong Stabiliser (Small bolt), 10 Pikmin, 60 Pokos.
#132 Coiled Launcher (Spring), 15 Pikmin, 70 Pokos.

The scenery is similar to that above, except there are fire vents here as well.
You can carefully swarm these with all of your Pikmin when they are off.  Three
Armored Cannon Beetle Larvae make the sublevel difficult; try to attack one
quickly with it facing away from any edges, and then move to one side,
whistling any Pikmin that are thrown off.  If both or even all 3 are together,
you can get them to kill each other.  It's generally easier to cope with these
if you have fewer Pikmin with you.  One of them is always half-buried, and
cannot be properly stunned by purples.  This one contains a treasure.

A final thing to look out for is the Ivory Candypop Bud.  There isn't much use
for White Pikmin left in the game (if this cave is the last of the first three
areas for you), but they can still be useful.  If you are lucky, the other two
treasures will be together, right next to the Research Pod, and the cave also
nearby.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 4

This sublevel contains neither beasts nor treasures: it is a rest level, one of
two in this cave.  Three Ivory Candypop Buds and many eggs are available to use
if you want to.  It is probable that at least one will contain a spray, so
break all the eggs.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 5

#087 Mystical Disc (Silver hands-less clock-face), 6 Pikmin, 75 Pokos.
#098 Adamantine Girdle (Nut [mechanical]), 12 Pikmin, 70 Pokos.

Sublevel 5 always has the same layout.  Bomb rocks are more common than ever,
along with myriad Volatile Dweevils.  It makes sense to take a single Captain
out to deal with these alone, but make sure to hit the Volatile Dweevils once
to ensure that they explode, as they won't otherwise if you run away too
quickly.

Even after combing the area in this way, some bomb rocks will still fall.
Those in particular to worry about are the ones that fall when treasures get
dug up or carried.  Mystical Disc, Adamantine Girdle and the hole are randomly
placed in some of the small dead-end paths leading off the main route down.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 6

#088 Vacuum Processor (Processor), 10 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.
#091 Space Wave Receiver(Black dial), 10 Pikmin, 80 Pokos.
#097 Repair Juggernaut (Medium bolt), 20 Pikmin, 85 Pokos.

Repair Juggernaut often starts right near you, so collect that treasure
straight away.  Other than perhaps a couple of the Dweevils (2 Fiery, 2
Caustic), the beasts are all in one room: a room of poison, electricity and
explosions.  It is by no means easy to kill all the beasts and remove other
hazards.  There are quite a few Anode Beetles and 2 Careening Dirigibugs; take
in few Pikmin to deal with these and hope that they're not all in one place.

Pick off whatever is closest to the entrance you choose.  Use Purple Pikmin to
overturn all the Anode Beetles nearby, then take down the Careening Dirigibugs,
upturning the Anode Beetles a few more times while you do this.  You may see a
Dweevil comically running around with a treasure for a head; ignore this for
now as it's not dangerous.  In fact, you can get it to run off an edge quite
easily, returning the treasure to the platform.

If the poison pipes are in the middle of the beasts, destroy those first, being
careful of electricity and explosions.  Attack the Anode Beetles last, with
Purple or Yellow Pikmin depending on whether you put emphasis on safety or
speed.

Finally, you will probably have to defeat a few more Anode Beetles for the last
treasure, or to get to the cave.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 7

#089 Indomitable CPU (Processor), 10 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.
#102 Furious Adhesive (Red tape), 10 Pikmin, 60 Pokos.
#162 Perfect Container (Tinned 'Beach Cliff Sardines'), 20 Pikmin, 130 Pokos.

There are bomb rocks and Careening Dirigibugs around yet again, and also what
is probably a new enemy to you: 2 Gatling Groinks.  These are part machine and
fire what resemble missiles, 3 at a time.  Luckily, these have a maximum range
and only kill Pikmin upon a direct hit, just scattering the Pikmin if indirect.
Attack from behind only, throwing Pikmin onto its back and seemingly
clockwork-based tail.  These beasts also regenerate life after they die, so be
careful.

One can be found roaming around anywhere: this can be defeated with bomb rocks
or by leading it over an edge quite easily; the other, up high and stationary,
is a bit harder to kill.  An Ultra-bitter Spray will not reach it; throw Pikmin
up to its back to release its treasure.  Strangely, the Gatling Groinks'
projectiles cannot initiate the timer of bomb rocks - you will have to do this
manually or risk your Pikmin inadvertently setting them off during battle.

Use eggs that are around if necessary, and walk to the far end of the sublevel
(this is a massive one) to find the remaining treasures.  Find the cave and
leave.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 8

You'll now find yourself in the cave's second 'rest' level: no treasure, no
beasts, much Candypopness.  There are eggs, and 3 Violet- and 2 Queen Candypop
Buds, and the cave (as well as an exit geyser, but we don't need that, right?).
Use 15 of the 18 Pikmin gained through the Queen Candypop Buds to produce
purples, then add flowers and absorb sprays.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 9

#190 Stellar Orb (Small light bulb), 5 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

As you begin here, you can see the boss - Man-at-legs - a steaming pile of
yellow-bronze metal - in front of you, in the centre of the sublevel.  Take a
few strong (purple) Pikmin, or some yellows for an easier, longer fight, and
hide the rest with the other Captain behind the cave right near you.  Attack
with all your Pikmin, throwing them on the metal sphere, and the boss will rise
up.

As it rises, you can spray it with an Ultra-bitter Spray for an extremely easy
battle if you want; otherwise, read on.  The Pikmin will fall off; whistle them
and throw them on again as the Man-at-legs stands up.  Whistle as it shakes,
and run (not near the other Captain) behind one of the many metal objects
scattered around, and swarm up against it from the other side, while the boss
shoots at you.

Once the shooting stops (there are 3-4 bursts of fire), attack again.  Without
Yellow Pikmin, you will have to encourage the Man-at-legs to stay near the
central platform, from where you can throw your Pikmin onto its body, or wait
until it lowers its body, seemingly catching its breath.  Once again, retreat
at the sign of it shaking them off.  Repeat this, and you should have a dead
Man-at-legs on your hands in no time.  Collect the treasure that lights up the
underground, then use the geyser to leave.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.3.3. Frontier Cavern
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Location: Valley of Repose
To find: Blue Pikmin

Walk past Emergence Cave, left over the bridge and forwards, then left past the
snowman; build the bridge to reach the cave.  You will need a good range of
Pikmin, up to 20 of each, with fewer whites and blues than the others.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 1

#084 Essential Furnishing (Silver Christmas bauble with string), 5 Pikmin, 100
     Pokos.
#110 Essence of Rage (Silver-ringed ruby), 8 Pikmin, 70 Pokos.

It's snowy again.  The red plants everywhere lower visibility and tend to hide
the many small Snow Bulborbs, so be wary.  As well as those, there are 2 Hairy
Bulborbs, both sleeping, and a few Doodlebugs that appear.  Both treasures are
randomly buried.

When a Doodlebug appears, throw Pikmin at it: the first time it is flipped over
releases Nectar, the second a pool of concentrated Ultra-bitter Spray, and then
another.  This means that, with careful aiming and timing, or use of purples,
each can be exploited for 4 Ultra-bitter Sprays, giving 12 in this sublevel
alone.  Be careful of the poison they release though.

(Tip 13 from the Tips section:
13. Concentrated doses of purple (Ultra-bitter) or red (Ultra-spicy) sprays can
be exploited to give 2 sprays each.  Firstly, you must press X, ridding the
Captain of all Pikmin and, most importantly, the other Captain (note: you must
have both Captains conscious for this feat).  Move close to the spray, though
not as much as to suck it up.  Next, switch Captains and move close again.
Carefully, so as not to slip and get the spray, push the first Captain into it.
When he begins to drink it, quickly run into it with the second Captain, and
your spray count on the left of the screen will rise by 2.  This is best done
in caves, where there is no time limit as to how long is taken on anything.)

Defeat the Bulborbs with careful throws, attacking the larger ones from behind,
and use the treasure Gauge to find the treasures, then exit to the next
sublevel.  If you have fewer than 20 total purples, there's a Violet Candypop
Bud here too.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 2

#079 Joy Receptacle (Red patterned Christmas present), 15 Pikmin, 60 Pokos.
#085 Icon of Progress (Small red Christmas stocking), 15 Pikmin, 85 Pokos.

This is a fairly small sublevel, with all the beasts sometimes cramped together
in one small room.  The theme of snow is continued, and now that of Christmas
introduced as well, with a present and a stocking as treasures.

There are 2 Decorated Cannon Beetles, 6 Snow Bulborbs and a Hairy Bulborb, the
latter asleep as usual.  If you take a small squad of about 15 Purple Pikmin
out to defeat the beasts, it's easy to keep track of them and not lose any.
Throw them around carefully, aiming for the beasts, perhaps allowing the
Decorated Cannon Beetles to help with their powerful boulders - but watch out
for these, as they kill Pikmin too.

The treasures are both easy to find, one often high up in the third room: use
the ramp.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 3

#080 Fleeting Art Form (Green swirly candle), 2 Pikmin, 75 Pokos.
#081 Danger Chime (Brass bell), 10 Pikmin, 120 Pokos.
#118 Gemstar Husband (Gold ring with green star), 5 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

On the next floor down, a maze is set in the snow, with low brick walls.  There
are only two large beasts - a Bulbmin and a Spotty Bulbear (with 6 smaller,
similar-looking minions) - but many hazards - fire geysers, electricity beams
and poison pipes.  Take these out as you move around, and try to find the
beasts.  These are all killed relatively easily with well-thrown Purple Pikmin;
if you have none, use an Ultra-bitter Spray on the Spotty Bulbear.

you can use your new Bulbmin in the Ivory Candypop Bud for more White Pikmin,
and use them to dig up the buried one of the 3 treasures, wherever it is.  The
Spotty Bulbear has the other treasure.  Make sure to either return that beast
to the Research pod or leave quickly if its body remains, or it will return
to life.  There is also an egg that you can use to give your Pikmin renewed
flowery vigour, and the final treasure is in plain view.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 4

#083 Innocence Lost (Christmas tree star), 15 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.
#120 Omniscient Sphere (Small orange marble), 1 Pikmin, 85 Pokos.

This sublevel is also snow-floored, and it is electricity-based.  Take your
Bulbmin and Yellow Pikmin to collect the treasures; you will not need to kill
the Anode Beetles or electric beams because they pose no threat to those Pikmin
colours (and, most likely, the Captains as well by now).  You will, however,
need to get rid of the 2 Swooping- and 3 Bumbling Snitchbugs.

Because this is a large sublevel, it will take a while for you to find the
treasures.  Omniscient Sphere is a very small marble which needs only one
Pikmin (or Bulbmin) to carry it; it is easy to miss.  The Treasure Gauge could
come in handy here.  Also, look for the Violet Candypop Bud, which it is
important to use.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 5

#188 Brute Knuckles (Black arm and fist), 15 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

Now, you will find a very different theme.  The snow is gone and the plants are
green.  There are many Unmarked Spectralids in the next room, along with 2
Caustic Dweevils and 4 Mamutas, beasts you have not met before.  There are 3
Candypop Buds near the Research Pod, 1 blue, 1 purple and 1 white.  The Mamutas
far from harmful: they plant Pikmin, which can be annoying if you haven't
collected the Pluckaphone yet, but they all turn into flowers.  It's worth
letting your Pikmin get planted to 'flower them up'.

The Unmarked Spectralids give Nectar if attacked with thrown Pikmin, and the
Caustic Dweevils should be defeated so that they cannot pick up the treasure,
which is in one of the Mamutas.  However helpful they may be, they have to die,
just like anything else you meet.  Use the eggs around if you want.

The treasure adds a third, powerful punch to the Captains' attacks, making them
better beast-fighting machines than ever.  Collect it before moving on down.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 6

#138 Worthless Statue (Light grey, stone king chess piece), 10 Pikmin, 80
     Pokos.
#139 Priceless Statue (Dark grey, stone queen chess piece), 10 Pikmin, 80
     Pokos.

It seems the snow is gone for good now; the air warms up as you travel deeper
underground.  One beast will often start where you do, probably a Decorated
Cannon Beetle or a group of Bulbmin.  Kill it with all your Pikmin.  As soon
as you leave the first room, there is water.  For now, leave your Pikmin behind
to go and kill everything yourself, putting your newfound third punch to use.

Use the 3 Decorated Cannon Beetles to squash everything else and then each
other, and then themselves.  if one is in too tight an area to be killed by a
boulder, punch away: there is a distance you can be at where all punches will
make contact but the Captain will not be hurt by any bucking.  The boulders
can also be used to reduce the fire geysers to...er...whatever they would be
without their fire.

With all hazards eliminated, you can walk through to that third,
treasure-containing room with your Blue Pikmin and some Bulbmin.  Break any
remaining fire geysers with the Bulbmin and look for the 2 10-weight treasures.
Collect them and continue to the seventh floor of Frontier Cavern.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 7

#082 Spouse Alert (Christmas bell), 10 Pikmin, 120 Pokos.
#134 Flame Tiller (Red, flame-decorated yo-yo), 20 Pikmin, 120 Pokos.

The best way to deal with the many beasts here is, again, to take only Purple
Pikmin out and about (but no leafed ones; their slowness makes the going much
tougher).  There are a lot of Orange Bulborbs and Dwarf Orange Bulborbs about,
and single boulders fall from the sky at every step.  The single Ivory Candypop
Bud can be used or not, if you want.  If you are scared that the boulders could
kill a Pikmin, make them all fall beforehand by wandering around with no
Pikmin.  It wastes time, but keeps your Pikmin safe.

One treasure is easy to find and the other is buried; collect both and return
them, then use the hole in the ground to access the cave's final floor.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 8

#189 Repugnant Appendage (Pink, baby-sized shoe), 20 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

This floor contains only one beast and one treasure; you'll never guess where
the treasure is...

Start by throwing every Pikmin on the high ledge near the Research Pod, where
they should be safe.  With both Captains, walk out through the arch to
encounter, after a while depending on how long it took you to get out, many
Bulborb Larvae.  Even with the Metal Suit Z, these beasts' bites are very
strong, and will also kill a Pikmin straight away; fortunately, they die with
one Captain's punch.  NEVER swarm them.

Punch your way through the mass of cream-coloured blobs to find the Empress
Bulblax.  Leave one Captain at the left (Bulborb Larva-producing) end and take
the other to collect the Pikmin which are far to the right.  Switch back at
intervals to kill off the group of beasts that attacks the Captain near them.
He must not die.

With the Pikmin, throw them on the Empress Bulblax's face, careful to whistle
them off when she shakes.  Bring the Captain from the other end to the front
and defeat any Bulborb Larvae that were not killed by the Bulblax's rolling.
Repeat the attack until the boss dies, then finish off any remaining Larvae.

To finish up here, collect the treasure, absorb as many of the pools of Nectar
as the Pikmin need, and use the exit geyser.  As the Research Pod will explain,
the Captains' speed is now increased because of the treasure: they can run as
quickly as flower-topped White Pikmin now.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.3.4. Hole of Beasts
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Location: Awakening Wood

From the Onions, head right, through the black gate there, left and then right,
watching out for the Cloaking Burrow-nit and Creeping Chrysanthemum on the way.
30 Red Pikmin should be enough to complete this cave, or 20 and 10 purples.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 1

#146 Stone of Glory (Black, circular D-Pad), 5 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

Go into the other room via the passage, and turn left or right to find the
treasure.  Sheargrubs (Male and Female) will burrow up from the ground at
various points in the room, so swarm them with C.  If a Pikmin is eaten by a
Male Sheargrub (purple ones), swarm it with the others quickly, so that it dies
before killing the Pikmin.  Then just collect the treasure with 10 Red Pikmin
or a few purple ones, waiting by the next sublevel's entrance while it is
returned to the Research Pod.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 2

This is a change for the worse, to a dull grey-brown, when compared to the
natural greens and browns of the level above, and to top it off, there are no
treasures here.  However, in the next room, there are 2 Violet Candypop Buds,
and an egg or two containing Nectar can be found in one of the many dead-ends,
which can be used to give your new Purple Pikmin flowers.  The cave to sublevel
3 is in the same room as the Violet Candypop Buds.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 3

#148 Cosmic Archive (yellow Famicom disk), 15 Pikmin, 230 Pokos.
#143 Strife Monolith (brown and white layered, patterned tile), 12 Pikmin, 150
     Pokos.

The colour has changed again: this time it's orange and red, because there's
lots of fire from ground-bound vents.  Take out only Red Pikmin from your
protective hidey-hole and, as long as you yourself, as the Captain, avoid the
fire, no one will be harmed.  As the Red Pikmin are unaffected by heat, there
is no need to destroy the vents, unless you really like destroying stuff.
So, simply go into the second room and collect the first treasure, which is
hidden in the shadows, deep in the dark grey stone thing.

Next, find the third room.  It is either to the left or right (it varies) and
contains the other treasure, Cosmic Archive.  Collect it and wait at the
hole to the next sublevel while it is taken back to the Research Pod along with
Strife Monolith.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 4

#145 Dream Architect (Game & Watch), 20 Pikmin, 280 Pokos.
#141 Luck Wafer (Ace of Spades), 1 Pikmin, 140 Pokos.

There is a Red Bulborb here, sometimes in the centre of the large space you
start in, or in a tunnel leading off, of which there are many.  Some may lead
to an egg, and one leads sharply right, to reveal Luck Wafer and a single
Violet Candypop Bud.  Defeat the Red Bulborb, done by throwing Pikmin quickly
on its back, and it will release Dream Architect.  Then find Luck Wafer and the
Violet Candypop Bud, return the treasure to the Research Pod and look for the
next cave.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 5

#186 Prototype Detector (Love Tester), 35 Pikmin, 200 Pokos.

The treasure required here is inside the boss beast: Empress Bulblax.  It can
only be collected by defeating her.  You begin in a small room that leads into
a much larger lair-like area, but in its centre is a curled up blob of a
massive creature, red with white spots.  Feeble, Pikmin-sized arms sprout from
below the comparably small head section, whose eyes on light brown stems
resemble those of ordinary Bulborbs.  Pikmin can attack it anywhere, but the
beast will roll from side to side, hitting the walls, squashing any Pikmin on
it or around it.

Of course, if you are in front, it can't hurt you, but it is hard to whistle
them off again because the Bulblax curls around before throwing them off.  So
go around the side, where a small niche in the wall can be hidden in when the
beast rolls.  Throw as many Pikmin as possible on the side of the red body, and
remove them when the Empress Bulblax moans and shakes the Pikmin, as they will
fly off after a few shakes.  Then retreat into the niche, where it is safe.
Repeat this once the beast stops moving, and then, if need be, further times.
It is best to use all the Pikmin in the cave with you.

The body will explode in sections, releasing slime and leaving a corpse and a
treasure nearby.  Collect this (after the ship examines it, of course) to add
it to your exploration kit, as the Treasure Gauge.  The exit geyser can be
found behind where the back end of the Empress Bulblax once was, in a niche in
the cave's wall.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.3.5. White Flower Garden
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Location: Awakening Wood
To find: 201 combined Pikmin weight

To find this cave, you first need a total Pikmin weight of 201, usually in the
form of 20 purples and another Pikmin.  Past the black gate near the Burgeoning
Spiderworts, put the Pikmin on the compressible paper bag and enter the cave
beyond.  Only Red Pikmin are needed in here, but some purples will help a lot;
simply take in whatever you happen to have with you after crushing the bag.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 1

#170 Nutrient Silo (Jar of peanut butter), 15 Pikmin, 35 Pokos.

There are Male Sheargrubs and Female Sheargrubs here; there is only need to
swarm the male one, as only they can harm Pikmin.  Through the gap, there is a
junction with a few more of each; do as before. The locations of treasure and
hole vary, so check which route has Nutrient Silo at the end, then collect it.
Go and wait by the cave to the next sublevel while it is taken back to the
rocket, then enter it.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 2

#103 Petrified Heart (Reddish, heart-shaped crystal), 5 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.
#183 Drought Ender ('Dr. Pepper' bottle cap), 4 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

This is a floating ring-shaped platform with 2 paths leading away.  One of
these leads to the cave entrance, and the other to nothing or one of the
treasures.  The other treasure is in the middle, on a brown ledge inside the
inner ring and, if the first was not down the path, it will be opposite the
second.

Living here are 2 Fiery Blowhogs, neither of which are a threat if you use only
Red Pikmin to collect the treasures.  However, throwing a few Purple Pikmin
onto a back for victory is quicker.  After collecting the treasures, exit.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 3

#100 Superstick Textile (Roll of 'Gamma Tape'), 30 Pikmin, 80 Pokos.

In this more cave-like place, you will find a very large room dotted with
green, orange and red plants; get there through the path turning left.  There,
a shallow basin-like area containing 3 Ivory Candypop Buds can be ventured
into.  Exchange 15 Red Pikmin for 15 white ones, then go to the left of the
basin area, to find a Honeywisp; use it to flower up all of your leafed and
budded Pikmin before carrying on.

In front of the arch leading through to the next room, your White Pikmin will
spot a buried treasure with their keen vision (note the big red eyes) and, as
is commonplace with such matters, the ship discusses them and this newfound
ability.  Return the treasure to the Research Pod with as many Pikmin as
possible, then continue into the next area, which is through a long, narrow
path.  This is the small room in which the cave to sublevel 4 is situated.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 4

#160 Container of Sea Bounty (German tin of herring in tomato sauce), 20
     Pikmin, 130 Pokos.
#014 Toxic Toadstool (Fungus), 5 Pikmin, 30 Pokos.

As you'd expect, after first gaining White Pikmin, you meet poison for the
first time in this cave, in the form of poison pipes.  These are close to the
start, and block all exits, so you need to use the new recruits to destroy
them.  The treasure, Toxic Toadstool, is somewhere behind them; find it and
return it to the Research Pod.  There are no beasts here, but there is one
other treasure, so look around.  If it is on top of a stump in a room with a
ramp around the edge, then you will have to go up the ramp to be high enough to
throw the Pikmin onto the stump.  After finding it, exit to the next (and
final) sublevel.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 5

#187 Five-man Napsack (Glove), White Flower Garden, 15 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

This is the Final Floor, and the wide, flower-covered path leads to a rather
small, lowered area surrounded by a thin raised part.  Three eggs are in the
corner: use these if any of your Pikmin do not have flowers, avoiding the
centre of this area until after

A Burrowing Snagret will burrow up from the ground.  If your aim is good, hold
A and switch to Purple Pikmin before going into the centre, then throw Pikmin
wildly as fast as possible onto the beast's head.  If done well, it shouldn't
attack, and will disappear again quickly.  Do not worry if any are eaten: if
you throw enough Pikmin accurately, and the Burrowing Snagret is occupied with
eating your Pikmin, and many of those thrown are purples, it should be enough
to defeat him straight away; and your eaten Pikmin should return from its mouth
after the Burrowing Snagret dies. If you find that your aim is not great where
moving targets are concerned, use the following different strategy.

If the Burrowing Snagret does not come quickly and cleanly out of the earth,
but has problems with its head, swarm it while only its head is showing.  When
it comes above ground fully, it should dig back down immediately.  If it does
not die the first time, repeat until it has done so, and released the treasure.
Finally, send as many Pikmin as you can back to the Research Pod with Five-man
Napsack, taking a Captain across the boundary and to the exit geyser.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.3.6. Bulblax Kingdom
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Location: Awakening Wood
To find: White Pikmin, Yellow Pikmin

Just past White Flower Garden, use the double-blocks to get up the rise and
continue in a circle, right, around the tree stump.  Climb up this where a
slope of a root reaches the ground and walk round to the electric fence, which
you should demolish.  The cave is a bit further on.

Firstly, it's good to have up to 30 of each reds and yellows.  Purple Pikmin
will help enormously in defeating certain beasts.  Bring 5 extra Pikmin than
you normally would to switch for white ones to unbury a treasure, or bring
whites anyway.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 1

#108 Crystal Clover (Emeralds in a gold, flat, four-leaved clover shape), 20
     Pikmin, 150 Pokos.

Each of the first 3 sublevels in this cave are surprisingly easy, and each
contains just a single treasure.  In the first, you will find 2 Orange
Bulborbs, 4 Dwarf Orange Bulborbs and a Crimson Candypop Bud.  Use the latter
if you somehow forgot to bring any reds in, probably swapping Yellow Pikmin for
them.  The treasure here is in one of the larger beasts, which are easily
defeated with Purple Pikmin thrown on top.  Beware, though, that once awake,
these things can eat VERY quickly.

The treasure needs 20 Pikmin carrying it, but add more unless you want it to
take forever.  While it is being collected, find the cave to sublevel 2.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 2

#106 Tear Stone (Sapphire), 5 Pikmin, 150 Pokos.

Use Red Pikmin here, so that you can just ignore the fire geysers and two Fiery
Dweevils, unless they intercept Tear Stone.  In the next room, this treasure is
often high up: throw Pikmin onto the lowest part of the circular ramp, whistle
them and use C to lead them around to it.

If one of the Dweevils does manage to pick up the treasure while it is being
carried back, throw more Pikmin onto the top of this jewel with legs.  If you
look closely, you can see the Pikmin still holding on just as they were before
it got picked up, dangling at what is quite a distance for their size.  I guess
they like shiny things.  Moving on, collect this and continue to the next floor
down.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 3

#047 Olimarnite Shell (Ammonite Fossil), 15 Pikmin, 40 Pokos.

The main thing to watch out for here is the 3 Withering Blowhogs, because of
the way they so annoyingly blow Pikmin's flowers and buds right off.  Attack
quickly as they will back away to be able to aim at your Pikmin; throw Pikmin
up onto the body and swarm when it falls.  Ignore the groups of Female
Sheargrubs unless you have some sort of hatred for them.  Locate the buried
treasure with the Treasure Gauge and uncover it with White Pikmin; you can also
add to your number of these with the Ivory Candypop Bud that is here.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 4

#052 Crystal King (Hexahedronal crystal), 10 Pikmin, 110 Pokos.
#055 Unknown Merit (Circle grey coin with a central square hole and Japanese
     inscriptions), 5 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

This sublevel is a bit harder because of the Wollywog that randomly falls from
the sky.  You will begin near a couple of Violet Candypop Buds and Honeywisps,
as well as some electricity.  Definitely use the flowers, souping up the 10 new
Purple Pikmin with Nectar from the Honeywisps; you may even be lucky enough to
have a spray fall from the egg of one of these.

When venturing out into the area of Anode Beetles, watch out for the falling
Wollywog, and defeat it by throwing Pikmin on top when it is on the ground.
Whistling them away again can lead to complications, so just leave them to be
scattered, after which they will attack again without coming to any harm.
There is no need to kill any Anode Beetles unless you plan on taking non-yellow
Pikmin out for whatever reason.  The treasure Unknown Merit is in the Wollywog,
while searching for and accurately flipping (easier with purples) the
Iridescent Glint Beetle will yield Crystal King.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 5

#009 Anxious Sprout (Plant bulb or sprout), 15 Pikmin, 50 Pokos.

A small amount of exploration here will reveal that bomb rocks like to fall
from the sky, appearing from thin air with a puff of smoke.  Use mainly Purple
Pikmin to rid the area of the Orange Bulborb and two Dwarf Orange Bulborbs, and
dig up the treasure (identified by the small part of it protruding from the
ground).
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 6

#045 Colossal Fossil (Upper part of a creature's skull), 20 Pikmin, 140 Pokos.
#104 Eternal Emerald Eye (Gold, patterned, flat shape with emerald), 20 Pikmin,
     150 Pokos.

Two Orange Bulborbs are somewhere around, one with a treasure, while their
smaller look-alikes are out in slightly larger numbers.  Fire geysers are
fairly numerous, but not so much so that you should only use Red Pikmin, which
makes it more difficult to kill the Orange Bulborbs with no deaths (use
purples).  Use the Violet Candypop Bud, and possibly the Crimson one for more
reds, and then look for the beasts and other, partially buried treasure.

Ignoring and avoiding the Fiery Dweevils where possible, find the two treasures
and send them back to the Research Pod.  Deal with Dweevil-related
interferences as you did in sublevel 2.  The cave to the final floor is usually
in the largest room.  Also be aware that bomb rocks fall in niches and alcoves
in this sublevel too.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 7

#054 Gyroid Bust (Wooden statue with a handle and three holes in its front), 10
     Pikmin, 250 Pokos.
#191 Forged Courage (Top half of a red metal man), 20 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

You will now fight the Emperor Bulblax, a relatively difficult boss.  Past the
fire geysers are a pair of eyes on stalks hidden in the ground; taking only
purples is probably best if you have many.  Wake the beast up by getting close
or throwing a Pikmin at the eyes, at which it will emerge.  Its main two
attacks are its tongue, which it uses to gather up yummy Pikmin, and a small
jump, which squashes all Pikmin in its immediate vicinity.

If you use Purple Pikmin, throwing them near the Emperor Bulblax can stun it
for a short while, giving you time enough to throw all your force on for a
kill.  Attack only the mouth, and never swarm.  If you have no Purple Pikmin,
the best way to win is mostly avoiding the tongue attack, throwing Pikmin onto
its mouth (no, not the inside of its mouth) in-between these.  To get the
battle off to a good start, throw some Purple Pikmin at its eyes and continue
to do so while it emerges; this can actually kill it before the battle even
begins.

After that, watch its complete slobberiness, collect the fire-proof treasure
and break down the white gate.  In the next room, you will need Red Pikmin: go
around to the right and throw them (at least 10) up to the ledge above.  Walk
around the other way yourself, up the fiery path to the top.  Retrieve the reds
and set them to collecting the treasure.  Find the geyser to the left to exit
the cave.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.3.7. Snagret Hole
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Location: Awakening Wood
To find: White Pikmin (supposedly Blue Pikmin too)

To get here, you will first need Blue and White Pikmin.  Go to where you found
Geographic projection and continue round, to the lake past there.  Defeat the
Yellow Wollywogs if necessary, build the two bridges and take your Pikmin
across.  Walk towards the white gate, defeating the Burrowing Snagret buried in
front of it, and demolish it to find the cave entrance.  I suggest that there
is no real need for blues because it's quite possible to throw a few White
Pikmin into the pool, running over to the other side and whistling them back
out, then building the bridges.

My recommendation is an even selection of White, Yellow, Blue and Purple
Pikmin.  Take a few reds if want, but they're not important here.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 1

#046 Leviathan Feather (Grey-white feather), 1 Pikmin, 10 Pokos.
#123 Crystallised Telekinesis (Yellow marble), 10 Pikmin, 120 Pokos.

This first area always has the exact same layout.  A path leads up to a larger
room, and another path leads up further to the cave and the feather treasure
in what seems to be a shed.  In the first of the rooms, there are quite a few
Male Sheargrubs waiting to ambush you, which are best killed by swarming.  An
Orange Bulborb sleeps in an alcove just beyond these; use Purple Pikmin to stay
safe, defeating it for the heavier treasure.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 2

#003 Combustion Berry (Large strawberry with leaves), 12 Pikmin, 190 Pokos.
#026 Taste Sensation (Triangular slice of dark brown cake with white icing and
     sunken cherry on top), 15 Pikmin, 40 Pokos.

This time, you're outside, which is strange considering this is underground...
Cloaking Burrow-nits, Creeping Chrysanthemums and Shearwigs are the enemies
here, the first two killed by Purple Pikmin-throwing and the latter by
swarming.  If a Shearwig flies, throw a Pikmin at it for an instant kill.  Look
around a bit, and you'll find the treasures and the cave down dead-end paths.
There are also a couple of eggs if needed.  Finally, an Ivory Candypop Bud is
somewhere around to add 5 more whites to your collection.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 3

#025 Meat Satchel (Small 'party-sized' sausage), 5 Pikmin, 40 Pokos.

I really don't like this one.  There are two Burrowing Snagrets and a Swooping
Snitchbug to take care of, and sometimes all 3 can be in the same spot.  White
gates are all around the room's edge, concealing the cave, one Ivory and one
Violet Candypop Bud, and lots of eggs.  The treasure is inside one of the
Snagrets.

There are two ways to kill Burrowing Snagrets with zero Pikmin loss.  The first
is the safe way: make one appear, and attack only if it has trouble getting out
of the ground, swarming its beak at that point (you'll know it when you see
it), as it will not attack.  Run away if it makes a smooth emergence.
Alternatively, throw all your Pikmin onto its head quickly, preferably purples
first, and it should die before it manages to digest (= kill) any of the Pikmin
it may have eaten.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 4

#001 Cupid's Grenade (Cherry with stalk and yellowish side), 3 Pikmin, 20
     Pokos.
#068 Heavy-duty Magnetizer (Classic red and white horse-shoe magnet), 10
     Pikmin, 150 Pokos.
#121 Crystallized Telepathy (Red marble), 10 Pikmin, 120 Pokos.

A blue-brown-floored platform presents itself now; watch out for its
edgelessness.  There are a few Watery Blowhogs and Armored Cannon Beetle
Larvae, along with Dwarf Orange Bulborbs.  Kill them all by throwing Pikmin on
top accurately, staying to one side and whistling them off before they get
thrown off with the first two mentioned.  Eggs fall from the sky in places, as
does one of the Armored Cannon Beetle Larvae.  Remember that Purple Pikmin make
everything easier.

Heavy-duty Magnetizer is inside an Armored Cannon Beetle Larva, while Cupid's
Grenade, Crystallized Telepathy and the cave are in corners, probably near
Dwarf Orange Bulborbs.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 5

#070 Emperor whistle (Stainless steel whistle), 15 Pikmin, 75 Pokos.
#125 Crystallized Clairvoyance (Blue marble), 10 Pikmin, 120 Pokos.

The first thing you should notice as you land here is the Treasure Gauge's
newfound state of madness.  It's because of the Antenna Beetle here, and can
be a nuisance.  The rusted metal design has returned, and be careful that this
is another dangerously suspended stage.  Hungry Dwarf Orange Bulborbs fall from
the ceiling at every turn (well, every now and then), one of which contains
Crystallized Clairvoyance.

Look around for eggs and the landing site of the Antenna Beetle.  You see, they
land on the ground every now and then from high up, scramble around a bit and
then jump off into the sky again, always in the same area.  Your chance to
attack is just after it lands, but be quick because it can whistle your Pikmin
to its side, they following the beast rather than the Pikmin Captains until it
leaves again.  Once defeated, the Antenna Beetles releases the Emperor Whistle.
Finally, find the cave at an edge somewhere.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 6

#017 Science Project (Four-leaved clover), 1 Pikmin, 20 Pokos.
#027 Triple Sugar Threat (Three balls, brown, pink and white, on stick), 6
     Pikmin, 60 Pokos.
#051 Mysterious Remains (Crab's claw), 8 Pikmin, 150 Pokos.
#174 Salivatrix (Blue 'Dannon' jar lid), 20 Pikmin, 30 Pokos.

Again, the Treasure Gauge is unfit to help, so you must find the Antenna Beetle
here.  As well as them, there are two Burrowing Snagrets (one with Triple
Sugar Threat, and very possibly both in the same room) and a lone Dwarf Orange
Bulborb (contains Mysterious Remains).  For beating these, use the strategies I
described in earlier sublevels.

You will also find an Ivory Candypop that it would be good to make use of, and
3 Lapis Lazuli Candypop Buds, which we don't need to use unless we forgot to
bring any Blue Pikmin into the cave...  Finally, there is a Queen Candypop Bud
- if this is your first, know that it changes colour and requires one Pikmin,
emitting 9 of the colour on its petals when given that one Pikmin to eat.

Salivatrix is behind a poison pipe that could be across some water.  Chances
are, you'll be able to sneak around an edge with your White Pikmin unharmed; if
not, throw a few over, one by one, taking a run up to throw further if need be.
Then you can collect the treasure with blues.  The final treasure, one that is
easy to miss, is tiny and in an alcove somewhere.  The cave will usually be
behind a black gate, often near the watery area.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 7

#193 Justice Alloy (Top half of a blue metal man), 20 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

Now begins the final sublevel, whose boss is the one I find the hardest in the
game.  This beast will quite obviously be found somewhere near the arena's
centre, so head forwards to begin with.  When the boss, the Pileated Snagret,
comes out of the ground, it will emerge quickly or slowly, as with the
Burrowing variety.  When it emerges quickly, however, it will begin feasting
immediately, and its head will be very high up, almost out of reach, so RUN FOR
YOUR PIKMIN'S LIVES.

Luckily, this variant of Snagret gets stuck coming out of the ground more often
than the more common type, and it too will not attack if this happens (but will
spread your Pikmin out in a multicoloured circle all around...).  The best
method for victory is to attack only when it is slow, swarming its beak and
then continuing to throw Pikmin on during the seconds it allows you to.  Use
an Ultra-bitter Spray just as it appears for best effect, and combine that with
an Ultra-spicy Spray for a very quick kill.  A final thing to bear in mind is
that it hops around after you and your Pikmin on its one leg after appearing,
surprisingly quickly.

After the fun has ended and you have collected the beast's treasure, look
around the arena's edges, through the white and black gates, for eggs, the
exit geyser and two Queen Candypop Buds.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.3.8. Citadel of Spiders
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Location: Perplexing Pool

From the rocket and Onions, go forwards and then left.  The cave is near the
water, in a small tree stump.  You'll need some White Pikmin, as there are
buried treasures, though there are Ivory Candypop Buds.  Reds and yellows are
important too, perhaps 25 of each, and a few Purple Pikmin won't go amiss.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 1

#011 Love Nugget (Tomato with leaves), 20 Pikmin, 40 Pokos.

The first sublevel contains only minimal threats.  Trees' roots, however,
sometimes create problems as Pikmin cannot easily walk over them; avoid these
if possible.  You're only looking for the one treasure here, which could be
anywhere, usually in a niche in a wall.  Watch out for Shearwigs, which are
best killed by swarming.  The cave is in a corner somewhere.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 2

#076 Lip Service (Stick of lipstick), 4 Pikmin, 50 Pokos.
#129 Paradoxical Enigma (Yellow rubber duck head), 4 Pikmin, 80 Pokos.
#181 Activity Arouser ('Sinalco' bottle cap), 4 Pikmin, 30 Pokos.

This is the fiery sublevel of this cave, and the reason for bringing the Red
Pikmin.  There are a few quite square rooms with fire geysers and Fiery
Dweevils; Activity Arouser is inside one of the Yellow Wollywogs.  If you use
Red Pikmin only, the two Wollywogs are the only threat - dispose of these with
about 30 Pikmin all thrown on at once, which should kill each in one attempt.

Next, simply collect the treasures and leave: Lip Service has probably been
picked up by a Dweevil by now (they can be made to drop anything they carry by
the throwing of Pikmin onto the object) and Paradoxical Enigma is partially
buried in a corner.  If you have fewer than 20 total purples, there's a Violet
Candypop Bud here.  The cave will be behind a white gate, probably in the
beast-infested room.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 3

#050 Memorial Shell (Bottom half of an oyster shell), 10 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.
#165 Open Architecture (Tin of salmon), 20 Pikmin, 130 Pokos.

Here is where Yellow Pikmin are useful.  Anode Beetles and Swooping Snitchbugs
are everywhere (apart from near the Research Pod, or on other sublevels, or
inside the white gate that protects the cave to sublevel 4...).  Unless you
want to take your chances with White Pikmin, locate the buried treasure
(Memorial Shell) and kill all Anode Beetles between it and the Research Pod
before attempting to collect it.  These beasts are best killed by throwing
(yellow) Pikmin on top and, when they are hit, swarming with the C-Stick.  You
only need attack the Snitchbugs if absolutely necessary.  Using purples makes
overturning the beetles easier, but introduces the risk of messy electrocution.

Open Architecture is easy to find (amidst the bugs, would you believe) and 
Memorial Shell is buried in a niche somewhere.  The cave will usually be behind
a white gate.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 4

#034 King of Sweets (Brown sweet in a paper cake holder), 5 Pikmin, 15 Pokos.
#073 Flame of Tomorrow (Bowser matchbox with one match), 10 Pikmin, 10 Pokos.
#075 Time Capsule (Locket with dog picture), 7 Pikmin, 70 Pokos.

There's a bit more fire here as well, along with a single Ivory Candypop Bud
and quite a few black and white gates.  There are 3 Water Dumples and 2 Hermit
Crawmads waiting around corners, one of the latter containing the King of
Sweets; you'll find Flame of Tomorrow on a ledge somewhere.  The final treasure
of this sublevel, Time Capsule, can be found near a wall, perhaps behind a fire
geyser.  You may have to kill the second, larger Hermit Crawmad to reach the
cave, which could be behind a gate.  Continue down this to the fifth and final
sublevel.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 5

#105 Regal Diamond (Diamond), 5 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.
#196 The Key (Golden key), 1 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

Here, walking into the centre of the large circular arena, you will find this
cave's boss, the Beady Long Legs - which, to be fair, is a very easy boss to
defeat.  I would suggest taking only Yellow Pikmin into the battle because
other types cannot as easily be thrown high enough to reach this creature's
body.

Beady Long Legs will appear to rest as it falls from the sky, which is your cue
to add Pikmin to the round...thing in its centre.  Just before the beast shakes
them off (you can tell by the way it suddenly stops seeming to pant and breathe
heavily) to safety.  Do not swarm the Pikmin at any point, because they will
try to attack the enemy's legs - which could get very messy, considering what
it will do next, walking around with great stompingness.  (Yes, I made that
word up.)

If you can, throw a few Pikmin onto the body again while it is moving its legs
about, because it won't try to shake them off for a while - and up there is a
safer place for those very squishable things than down on the ground.  The
battle will continue in the same way, the boss taking rest stops every now and
then, until you beat it (for an interestingly rapid boss disintegration); at
low life, Beady Long Legs will stomp faster: just keep a safe distance.

The treasure that emerges is The Key, carried by a maximum of 3 Pikmin (but the
Research Pod won't allow you to take it just yet, and its presence is ignored
by any Pikmin ordered to retrieve it until you are told that Challenge Mode has
been unlocked).

The other treasure is buried on one of the small platforms between the starting
point of this sublevel and the boss' arena.  Search in corners around this
intersection of a room to find an Iridescent Flint Beetle, which will award
sprays and pools of Nectar when overturned (most easily achieved using Purple
Pikmin).  Leave via the geyser at the third exit of this intersection.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.3.9. Glutton's Kitchen
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Location: Perplexing Pool
To find: Yellow Pikmin

Past the double-blocks leading to the Yellow Onion, turn left and go round to
find an electric fence.  Demolish this to access the cave behind.  By this
time, you probably won't have collected many Yellow Pikmin yet, so take a
number of reds and purples along with up to 35 yellows.  White Pikmin are not
needed and don't help much, unless you like their speed.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 1

#065 Master's Instrument ('Mario Paints' small 'Peach Pink' crayon), 4 Pikmin
     30 Pokos.

You will land on a wooden floor with coloured blocks, very much like the
traditional, stereotypical child's toybox.  A number of Dwarf Bulbears are
looking around ravenously, and the only treasure, Master's Instrument, is
inside a wooden-walled box - thankfully with slopes of colourfulness to get
back out.  There will sometimes be a Dwarf Bulbear (possibly 2) in there as
well; to be safe, throw Pikmin over the side it is nearest to for immediate
squishification (if well-thrown).

After collecting the treasure, for which it is probably necessary to clear the
path of Bulbears (purples work best, but a single perfect throw kills in one
with any Pikmin), find the cave to the next sublevel.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 2

#031 Imperative Cookie (Round biscuit with clockwise swirl on top), 5 Pikmin,
     25 Pokos.
#163 Survival Container ('Clabber Girl' baking powder), 10 Pikmin, 130 Pokos

Again, there are children's toys around: a wooden railway set circles the
centre of the area.  Male and Female Sheargrubs burrow up from underground, and
a few Breadbugs are patrolling.  The latter are, for the most part, harmless,
but steal treasures and dead beasts and take them into their lairs.  These are
hoarded and only the treasures can reappear; this happens if the beast is
killed.  Ignore Female Sheargrubs and get rid of the Male variety by swarming.
The single Cloaking Burrow-nit is best killed by swarming, or throw on Purple
Pikmin to freeze it momentarily first if you have any.

As you land from the sky, a Breadbug will probably have already taken a
treasure for its own; it is impossible to locate which one by using the radar,
so defeat them all.  To do this, either take the Breadbug back to the Research
Pod by putting Pikmin on a beast or treasure it is carrying if it is, or throw
Pikmin directly on top of it.  The treasures start on rooftops or just lying
around, so find them and leave via the cave that will be near the Research Pod.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 3

#069 Harmonic Synthesizer (Red and blue 'clapper' with yellow string at the
     back), 10 Pikmin, 120 Pokos.
#071 Director of Destiny (Broken circular compass), 20 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

You will find a massive xylophone and surprisingly small tambourine here, some
more Breadbugs, a Golden Candypop Bud, lots of electricity and a Puffy Blowhog.
Firstly, when you come across that Yellow Pikmin-producing flower, it would be
a good idea to turn some reds into yellows if you have any; otherwise, don't
bother.  Anode Beetles are everywhere and (shockingly) 2 more fall from the sky
when an egg is broken.

Again, the Breadbugs may have stolen some treasures already, so attack them to
check.  The Puffy Blowhog serves only to annoy and contains no treasures: kill
it only if it makes collecting a treasure too hard.  Take only yellows around
to collect the treasures so that there is no need to kill any Anode Beetles.
Just make sure that you watch any treasure being taken back to the Research Pod
or put the maximum number of Pikmin on it, or it may be taken by a Breadbug,
killing all the Pikmin carrying it.

The cave is in a corner somewhere.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 4

#038 White Goodness (Round, white and brown-striped sweet in a paper cake
     holder), 8 Pikmin, 60 Pokos.
#059 Invigorator (Upside-down blue mug), 20 Pikmin, 130 Pokos.
#172 Drone Supplies (French packet of Haribo sweets), 15 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

To start off, this has become my most hated sublevel, ever.  What makes it hard
is the Spotty Bulbear who walks around with 3 smaller versions of himself, and
the fact that I had no Ultra-bitter Sprays.  If you have an Ultra-bitter Spray,
go for the Spotty Bulbear straight away, spraying it and its 3 followers at
once (easy if you angle it right).  Then kill it BEFORE the spray runs out and
dispose of the little ones afterwards.  It must be killed before to make the
body disappear and, hopefully, give you a couple more sprays: Spotty Bulbears
regenerate after death.

If you have no sprays, then you absolutely NEED Purple Pikmin to avoid any
deaths; throw them on all at once to temporarily paralyse the beast, then swarm
it and its minions.  With no purples, it seems that a death or two is the only
possibility.  However, without a spray, collect all other treasures first, so
as to be able to leave before the thing comes back alive.

The Spotty Bulbear will drop a bag of Haribo sweets and another Dwarf Bulbear
is prowling around somewhere.  The other 2 treasures will probably be on the
wooden house and table, a cake and a cup, of weights 8 and 20 respectively.
Watch out for the Breadbugs as usual when collecting these.  Let them have fun
taking away the Dwarf Bulbear corpses.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 5

#092 Sulking Antenna (Aerial), 35 Pikmin, 150 Pokos.
#133 Magical Stage (Child's make-up thingy, Japanese), 30 Pikmin, 150 Pokos.

There are Armored Cannon Beetle Larvae in most of the circular areas dotted
around the walls, and the large yellow plate, all ready to pop out and attack
when you get too near.  Throw Pikmin on to kill them if they are likely to kill
any.  Dwarf Bulbears are absolutely everywhere as well, looking their meanest
in numbers, ready to munch on Pikmin goodness if it comes too close to their
sharp teeth...

The treasures are both large, requiring 35 and 30 Pikmin to carry them, so I
suggest using about 5 purples for each.  It would be good to use the Violet
Candypop Bud that is around here somewhere to stock up on a few more purples.
Switch, preferably, Red Pikmin for the new recruits.  The treasures are placed
randomly in very visible places.

After collecting Magical Stage (I know for certain that this is not the same as
in the NTSC version of this game) and Sulking Antenna, look for the cave that
leads down to the final sublevel.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 6

#023 Meat of Champions (Gammon steak), 10 Pikmin, 35 Pokos.
#024 Hideous Victual (Fried egg), 10 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.
#040 Sweet Dreamer (Doughnut with pink icing), 10 Pikmin, 40 Pokos.
#192 Dream Material (Half of an eraser), 10 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

There are a surprisingly large amount of beasts here for the sublevel's size;
there are a number of Anode Beetles, more Breadbugs and a single Giant
Breadbug.  The area is yellows-only because of all the electricity hazards, so
procure them and start fighting the Breadbugs for the treasures.  A doughnut, a
slice of ham and a fried egg are on plate on the opposite side of the room,
while the large plate in the centre holds the Breadbugs' lairs' entry holes.  I
don't understand how somebody's bedroom and kitchen ended up underground,
infested with all manner of boogly-eyed creatures...

The most important treasure is inside the Giant Breadbug, for which you must
defeat it.  The easiest way to do this is collect the treasure he is holding,
twice to nearly kill.  Only Purple Pikmin can hurt it otherwise, in the same
way that any other Pikmin hurts a normal Breadbug.

Collect the treasures, use the eggs' Nectar if you want (being careful of the
Anode Beetles), and leave, happy with your newfound resistance to electricity.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.3.10. Submerged Castle
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Location: Perplexing Pool
To find: Blue Pikmin

From the landing site, head left and forwards along the path on the left.
Continue alongside the lake and then through the water itself until you reach
a black gate, avoiding the Yellow Wollywog along the way.  Demolish this and
turn right, past the 2 Hermit Crawmads and couple of flying beasts, then around
the set of quad-blocks to the cave entrance.

It is only possible to take Blue Pikmin into this cave, due to its being
submerged.  I recommend between 30 and 50.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 1

#030 Bug Bait (Flat, circular, light brown, speckled biscuit), 5 Pikmin, 15
     Pokos.
#036 Diet Doomer (Pink sweet in a paper cake holder), 5 Pikmin, 25 Pokos.
#042 Pastry Wheel (Circular pastry coil with icing), 10 Pikmin, 35 Pokos.

You begin in a maze-like area with pools and a couple of Fiery Blowhogs around,
one of which often falls from the sky.  Fire geysers and a sleeping Fiery
Bulblax are also placed randomly throughout the sublevel; obviously, your
Pikmin are vulnerable to the hazard presented by all these, so care must be
taken.  Eggs are in a number of places, which you should break in hope of
sprays being inside.

Of the 3 treasures, 2 are in random places (the Diet Doomer often slightly
hidden under a low arch in water) and Bug Bait is in the Fiery Bulblax.  If
this beast is already in water, you are lucky; it's a good idea to reset until
its placement is favourable in such a way.  Attack, preferably with one of the
sprays, from behind.  If it is not in water, its flame is lit, so you will have
to lead it to water by awakening the beast and walking in front of it.  Attack
as it leaves to return to its slumber and has its back to you, or paralyse it
with an Ultra-bitter Spray while extinguished.

Either way, before collecting treasures, you will need to stop the fire geysers
that could harm the Pikmin carrying them; attack by swarming when they are off.
With Bug Bait from the Bulblax, Pastry Wheel and Diet Doomer, leave for the
next sublevel.  And a final note: beware of time, here.  Be quick, because
after 5 minutes, the Waterwraith, the boss of this cave, will appear with his
steamroller-like vehicle thing, and crush Pikmin with no remorse.  NO REMORSE.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 2

#032 Comfort Cookie (Square brown-and-white-checked biscuit), 4 Pikmin, 10
     Pokos.
#039 Chocolate Cushion (Doughnut with brown icing), 10 Pikmin, 40 Pokos.
#041 Confection Hoop (Pastry strip wound around itself into a doughnut shape),
     20 Pikmin, 60 Pokos.

This sublevel is home to what is probably the first group of Bulbmin you've
ever met, a Careening Dirigibug, 3 Dwarf Orange Bulborbs, 3 Fiery Dweevils and,
of course, the Waterwraith.  It'll please you to know that the layout is always
the same, if not the placement of the Careening Dirigibug and Dwarf Orange
Bulborbs.  

Break down the 2 black gates keeping you in place; take one to find some water,
the cave with a plug over it and Chocolate Cushion, which you will need to
throw Pikmin over the gap onto to collect.  About the Bulbmin: only the larger
one will be able to attack your Pikmin, and it eats quite fast.  Use Z for a
bird's eye view and throw Pikmin directly on top of the beast and none should
die.  It yields Comfort Cookie.  For the Careening Dirigibug, throw Pikmin at
it whether it has a bomb rock in hand or not, but call them back and run away
when it falls to the ground, then attack quickly by swarming after the
explosion.

Where the river and large slope are, go up the slope and through the pipe,
around to Confection Hoop.  Watch it as it returns, because Fiery Dweevils from
the pipe above to the left are likely to attempt a hi-jacking.  With all 3
treasures returned, continue by the cave you uncovered earlier.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 3

#028 Compelling Cookie (Anti-clockwise-whirled light brown biscuit that rises
     into a peak), 3 Pikmin, 10 Pokos.
#033 Succulent Mattress (Square brown-and-white checked biscuit), 8 Pikmin, 50
     Pokos.
#180 Pondering Emblem (Red 'Tizer' bottle cap), 4 Pikmin, 30 Pokos.

This next sublevel is very difficult to complete within the time without losing
any Pikmin.  It's a complex maze of electricity, to which, as it so happens,
Bulbmin are invulnerable.  An Ivory Candypop Bud awaits use, though it's not
important unless you have fewer than 30 White Pikmin total.  Another group of
Bulbmin are ready to add themselves to your collection, and gates are
everywhere.  Beasts include 2 Withering Blowhogs, many Anode Beetles, a few
Anode Dweevils and a Wollywog.  And don't forget the Waterwraith.

Begin by searching for the treasures, one in a Withering Blowhog, the other
near an Anode Dweevil and the third often behind a gate.  Take a few Bulbmin
around to eliminate electrical threats before committing your blues to battles
all over.  Once again, the cave is covered with rock, which needs to be
destroyed.  The Compelling Cookie is very small, pale brown, very easy to miss,
and very prone to capture by an Anode Dweevil.  If you feel that simply
avoiding the Wollywog is too unsafe, swarming it and leaving your Pikmin is the
best option.

Collect the treasures, use eggs and leave before the Waterwraith lands.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 4

#037 Pale Passion (Square cream-coloured sweet in a paper cake holder), 5
     Pikmin, 25 Pokos.
#155 Proton AA (Duracell AA battery), 6 Pikmin, 90 Pokos.
#169 Open Archive (Tin of beans), 20 Pikmin, 130 Pokos.

You'll find 2 more sets of Bulbmin to aid you here, making a grand total for
the cave of 4.  There's also quite a bit of water, poison (to which Bulbmin are
immune), falling bomb rocks and both types of bomb rock-carrying beasts - a
Careening Dirigibug and 4 or more Volatile Dweevils.  As you walk around,
bomb rock associated things will fall from the sky, so be careful.  They are
easy to avoid, but it is best to kill the Careening Dirigibug, done similarly
to on sublevel 2.

Capture the Bulbmin available and search for the treasures, a battery that is
hard to see and randomly placed, a tin that is massive and hard to miss, and a
pale cake in an Iridescent Glint Beetle.  Attack the latter by throwing and it
will release the treasure.  Use the eggs if need be.  Again, the cave is
covered in stone and behind a gate.  Remember to be quick.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 5

#195 Professional Noisemaker (Red megaphone), 15 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

And with that, the hard part of the cave has finished.  You'll find 2 Violet
Candypop Buds here behind gates, as well as eggs, so switch some of the very
expendable Bulbmin for purples and flower them up.  Take only those Purple
Pikmin into the boss room, where you will finally fight that Waterwraith which,
after all the terror it's caused, is suspiciously easily dealt with.

Go near the egg and you will hear a whistling, see a shadow and, before long,
the Waterwraith will land.  After it finishes blobbing about a bit and looks
like it is going to move, attack with Pikmin, throwing them on top, at which it
will turn purple (= vulnerable) and cower in fear.  Throw the Pikmin back on
when they are thrown off and repeat; when the boss turns clear again, wait and
just before it rolls off, attack once more.  This phase of the battle will end
in no time.

After its life is completely drained, the Waterwraith will lose its stone
wheels and run around in what we can suppose is fear of your Pikmin's
purpleness.  Attack when it runs out of puff, similarly to before, and you will
be able to collect the Professional Noisemaker which, the Research pod will
tell you, enables quicker plucking of Pikmin sprouts.

Use the geyser and say farewell to your Bulbmin.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.3.11. Shower Room
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Location: Perplexing Pool
To find: Yellow Pikmin, Blue Pikmin

To get here, you will need Yellow Pikmin and Blue Pikmin.  Begin by turning
right and around the back of the stone square where the Onions are.  Walk
carefully alone the narrow ledge on the far left of the pool with Yellow Pikmin
and demolish the electric fence on the other side.  If you have a fair few
yellows, or find some trouble in navigating the path, throw them up to the left
just before, then whistle them from the path and walk along to the bridge,
where they can fall back off.

(Of course, collect a couple of overground treasures while that is being taken
care of.)  Once complete, take Blue Pikmin into the pool past that point and
attack the plug over the entrance to Shower Room.  This will also drain the
entire body of water around this tiled structure, allowing you to collect
another treasure.

With Shower Room revealed, take a few yellows, whites and purples, but mostly
blues inside.  A total of about 60 Pikmin should be enough.

I will take this time to note a glitch that allows one to enter the cave
without the use of Yellow Pikmin, but it's not something I recommend for a
first playthrough.  It involves teleporting a Captain by collecting a treasure
while moving on a set of scales.  To allow yourself quick retries at this, as
timing is tricky, let some Pikmin carry a treasure very near the ship (any will
do), then stop it and enter then leave a cave (Citadel of Spiders is easy to
reach).

Next, proceed with one Pikmin to the set of scales down the path past Citadel
of Spiders, then put some Pikmin on the set up treasure.  Switch back to the
scales, then throw the Pikmin onto the higher block with the Captain on the
lower one such that he rises as the treasure is collected.  It can take a few
goes to get the timing right for this.

After the cutscene, you will notice that you are now inside the block; walk off
in the direction of the Onions (this is important), and you will teleport to
the top of the stone wall next to the ship.  Walk around to the submerged gate
nearby and then over that; to get over the far end post, run off to the right,
falling through the air a bit to land on the level's edge.

Now with that Captain out-of-bounds, throw some blues up to him and walk around
the back of the level and straight into the tiled area containing the Shower
Room.  Drain the water, and you can enter the cave.  Of course, to take Pikmin
of other colours in, you can walk a few up to the outside of the box-like
structure and whistle them from inside before entering.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 1

#062 Divine Cooking Tool (Dodgy-handled saucepan), 20 Pikmin, 90 Pokos.

The inside of this cave, at first, looks pretty much like it was around the
outside: the floor and walls are tiled, and dull sand is heaped in places.
Naturally, the beasts here are a similar colour to the ground, or related to
water.  Two Watery Blowhogs are here with a Wollywog (that's the grey variety).
Wogpoles fall from up above quite a bit, as do single boulders trying to squish
some Pikmin.  A few electric beams are present, but often don't need to be
stopped.

Walk around, wary of the boulders, killing the 3 larger beasts of the sublevel;
they will all fall to the power of Purple Pikmin, or otherwise to careful
rounds of attacking and retreating.  The lone treasure is in the only other
large room, and the cave is nearby.  Ignore the Wogpoles.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 2

#072 Sud Generator (Square-ish bar of 'mild soap'), 20 Pikmin, 60 Pokos.
#156 Durable Energy Cell (Duracell C battery), 15 Pikmin, 160 Pokos.

This time around there are 2 treasures, some Dwarf Orange Bulborbs (some fall
from above), and the first of many Lesser Spotted Jellyfloats.  A larger Orange
Bulborb is sleeping somewhere, perhaps in the square pit in the other large
room, and is near a treasure.  The smaller versions of this beast are easily
taken care of with an accurate throw, but this one is trickier.  Always attack
from behind, with Purple Pikmin if you have any.  There are poison emitters in
various places as well, which can be annoying if near the Jellyfloat.  If you
have fewer than 20 total purples, there's a Violet Candypop Bud here.

There is no need to attack the Lesser Spotted Jellyfloat unless it sucks up any
Pikmin; and even then, you have a while before they need to be saved and can
even continue to the next sublevel and the not-yet-digested Pikmin will follow.
To attack, simply throw Pikmin at the beast.  It takes a LONG time to fully
kill Pikmin it has sucked up, so there's no hurry.

Again, watch out for falling boulders.  Collect the treasures and go.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 3

#049 Scrumptious Shell (Top half of an oyster shell), 10 Pikmin, 60 Pokos.
#058 Vorpal Platter (Tin can lid), 12 Pikmin, 60 Pokos.
#077 Mirrored Stage (Make-up thingy), 15 Pikmin, 140 Pokos.

There are many more Jellyfloats here, one of them a Greater Spotted Jellyfloat.
This larger type has pink spots and sucks up Captains as well as Pikmin; if you
get caught, twirl the control stick around to be let free.  This beast contains
one of the treasures.  Water Dumples are around as well, a couple falling from
the sky, and a Wollywog appears in a random place.  Finally, beware of the
Hermit Crawmad.  Luckily, there are no falling rocks on this sublevel.

You are likely to have at least one, if not all, of the treasures in water,
which is why you need a fair amount of Blue Pikmin.  If the shell happens to be
under the low arch in a pool, it can be hard to get enough Pikmin to grab onto
it: the best option is to throw them all and wait for enough to find a place to
hold, which can take a while.  The cave is fairly easy to find.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 4

#019 Arboreal Frippery (Red Autumn leaf), 1 Pikmin, 10 Pokos.

This sublevel is a welcome break from the mayhem of the previous 3.  If you
begin in water, there is no need to panic because it is shallow enough that it
harms no Pikmin.  The layout is always the same, but things placed differently.
Aim for the large, round room on the map.

Two Queen Candypop Buds are in this room and the one through the hole at one
side, with many Unmarked Spectralids flying around.  Top up on whichever Pikmin
colour you need most and flower them up with Nectar from those butterfly-like
creatures - extinguish each with a well-aimed throw (in other words, go crazy
with the A-button and control stick and hope for the best).

From the second, large, square room as you enter it, turn right and walk down
the gentle slope.  Turn right here to see the 1-weight treasure in a pipe, then
turn left for the cave or continue onwards for the exit geyser.  On second
thoughts, no; no geyser for you.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 5

#061 Merciless Extractor (Fruit strainer), 20 Pikmin, 90 Pokos.
#166 Permanent Container (Orange 'ICC' container), 20 Pikmin, 130 Pokos.
#178 Happiness Emblem (White 'Fristi' bottle cap), 4 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

It is important to defeat the two Withering Blowhogs, as their withering powers
can seriously cripple the combined power of your Pikmin.  As you go looking for
the treasures, find the Violet Candypop Bud and collect 5 more Purple Pikmin.
If the beasts are all grouped together, it can be tough not to lose any Pikmin:
try to pick them off one by one, perhaps with only a few Pikmin with you so as
to be able to keep track of them.

In most cases, there will be a room with a steep slope of sand; if there is,
walk up it with only Blue Pikmin, encouraging them with the C-stick if reduced
to being leaf-topped.  Throw them over to the right, through the metal bars and
onto the treasure.  If you have too few Blue Pikmin to carry it, restart until
the 4-weight treasure is the one that appears there, or until the room does not
exist.

Beasts that are here are Dwarf Orange Bulborbs, Fiery Blowhogs and the
Withering Blowhogs, all easy to kill separately but dangerous together.  There
are some fire geysers that only need to be taken care of if in the path of a
treasure you plan to carry with non-red Pikmin.  Another Lesser Spotted
Jellyfloat will appear at some point, so dispose of it as in sublevel 3.  Find
the two final treasures both in plain view, and leave for the next floor down.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 6

#078 Behemoth Jaw (Lower jaw of set of false teeth), 20 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.
#128 Rubber Ugly (Yellow rubber duck), 8 Pikmin, 90 Pokos.
#171 Plentiful Tank (Yellow jar of honey), 8 Pikmin, 50 Pokos.

Beasts will start in the same room as you, here.  These could be the Wollywog,
Dwarf Orange Bulborbs, the Bumbling Snitchbug or the Orange Bulborb.  Defeat
them as previously described, and the Bumbling Snitchbug by throwing Pikmin.
This beast swoops and grabs the Captains rather than Pikmin, so be ready to
dodge.  Twirl the control stick to perform an escape.

One of the gates nearby could conceal a treasure.  The next place to go is down
the aisle of arches, a long strip of tiled floor with dark alcoves either side.
Three Dweevils are hidden here, two Munge Dweevils and a more dangerous
Volatile Dweevil, all ready to pounce on you or treasure.  A Doodlebug will
appear from the ground somewhere, and can be attacked to give Nectar and
sprays, but watch out for the poison it releases.

That low, underwater arch is back again, and can have a treasure underneath.
Just hope it's not a large one.  The cave is usually at the end of the long
path, and a treasure is in one of the arches at the sides.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 7

#194 Amplified Amplifier (Grey loudspeaker), 20 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

This is Shower Room's final sublevel, and holds its boss, which is an easy win
if you know how.  Begin by razing the mass of gates around here, or just the
one to gain access to the boss if you wish.  If you have any leaf-topped Purple
Pikmin, it is best to leave them behind due to their unbelievable slowness.
Separate the Captains, giving one the Pikmin, and enter the annoyingly small
arena to start the battle music.

Get close to the boss with the Pikminless Captain, whom I will call Louie for
the sake of ease.  Notice the Ranging Bloyster's tail-bud turn blue, along with
its eyes, and that it begins to move towards Louie.  Switch to Olimar and the
colours will change to red, the target to him.  Take Louie around the side
opposite to Olimar, and wait until the boss faces him.  At that point, switch
Captains twice, so that you have control of Louie still, and then switch back
to Olimar just as the boss turns red.

If timed correctly, this will confuse the Ranging Bloyster, who will turn blue
and then red again before beginning to even turn around or shake off the Pikmin
that should, by now, have been thrown onto the bud on its back by Olimar.  Just
a single attack should be enough to defeat the boss; if not, repeat the process
once more.  You are now free to collect the treasure, which enlarges the range
of the Captains' whistles.  Break down the gate to the exit geyser and leave
the cave, now completely devoid of treasure.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.3.12. Cavern of Chaos
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Location: Wistful Wild

This cave is very easy to find.  Starting at the landing area, walk forwards,
defeating the Dwarf Red Bulborbs, and walk around the left of the rusted metal
structure in front.  Watch out for the Decorated Cannon beetle, though there is
no reason to kill it, and enter the cave on the other side.  Take in a good
selection of Pikmin.  Purple Pikmin, as always, are needed for battle.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 1

#035 Enamel Buster (Large, almond-topped, brown sweet in a paper cake holder),
     8 Pikmin, 60 Pokos.
#124 Mirth Sphere (Small blue marble), 1 Pikmin, 85 Pokos.

As with many other caves, the design here is a floating, rusted metal platform.
The first 3 hazards - fire, water and electricity - are all here, in the form
of a Fiery and a Watery Blowhog and electric beams.  A few Careening Dirigibugs
and bomb rocks are the only other obstacles between you and the treasure.

Run around Pikminless and set off the bomb rocks, killing the Blowhogs in the
process by leading them into the explosions.  This will also destroy any nearby
electric beam generators.  Take your Pikmin to defeat the bomb rock-wielding
beasts in the air, collecting the two very differently-sized treasures.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 2

#111 Essence of Despair (Silver-ringed emerald), 6 Pikmin, 80 Pokos.
#116 Frosty Bauble (Gold ring with blue square), 5 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.
#117 Gemstar Wife (Silver ring with blue star), 5 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

This sublevel is a large, roughly circular arena, which you may recognise from
Subterranean Complex's Man-at-legs fight.  The 6 beasts are spread out: the
Fiery Bulblaxes are the ones with the 3 treasures; the Swooping Snitchbugs
serve only to annoy and are no threat at all once equipped with the
Pluckaphone.  The Bulblaxes are fairly easy to dispatch of with a number of Red
Pikmin: take all the ones you have, use an Ultra-spicy Spray and kill all 3
before it runs out.  With everything dead, collect the treasures and go to
sublevel 3.

If you have no reds, purples can be used instead: throw them on quickly,
whistle to save them from the flames, and repeat.  They cause damage upon
landing, and stun the enemy in the process, making it an easy fight.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 4

#012 Infernal Vegetable (Jalapeo), Cavern of Chaos, 12 Pikmin, 30 Pokos.
#010 Child of the Earth (Potato), 15 Pikmin, 40 Pokos.

This sublevel is flowery, but don't let that fool you.  Creeping Chrysanthemums
are buried in every room: look carefully at the Margarets' flowers' centres for
eyes to tell which are likely to pop up and eat your Pikmin.  Other than those,
there are only a couple of Mamutas, which are the second priority in any
battle, and boulders that come crashing down from above in a few places.  One
treasure is buried and the other isn't; find them, possibly having to demolish
a black gate.

To defeat the Creeping Chrysanthemums, swarming is usually the best option, but
you can throw a few Purple Pikmin next to them to stun them for a bit.  The
cave is as easy to find as the treasures were, often behind another gate.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 5

#060 Milk Tub (Small milk container with half-removed foil lid), 5 Pikmin, 60
     Pokos.
#159 Container of Knowledge (Red, French tin of sardines), 20 Pikmin, 130
     Pokos.

There are 2 treasures here: one is behind a black gate, often near the Research
Pod; the other is inside one of the underground Emperor Bulblaxes, either in
the water or near it.  Fire geysers make defeating these difficult - and you
may have to defeat both of them, as the Pikmin insist on carrying the treasure
past the other one if the further contains it.

To defeat these, you have several options, depending on whether the
treasure-containing one is in water (use the Treasure Gauge to check).  If it
is not in water, take Purple Pikmin and throw them onto its eyes; it will erupt
and die quite quickly; whistle and reapply them if it doesn't get stunned.

If it is in water, it is safest (but slowest) to defeat it with the bomb rocks.
This entails leading the Emperor Bulblax to bomb rocks and waiting near them
until it sucks them up.  Explosions and woozliness follow, and it will die
after ingesting a few more.  Once out of bomb rocks, you will have to defeat
any Emperor Bulblaxes remaining in the water with Blue Pikmin if you cannot
lure them out or at least near an edge (if you can, use purples).  Be careful
with throwing them on its mouth and whistle them away as the beast shakes.

Finally, if one of the beasts is only just off the land, you can throw Purple
Pikmin at its eyes from land, and then whistle them to safety if any fall in
the water.  Whichever way you choose, collect the treasures and move on.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 5

This is a treasure-free 'rest' sublevel, with 3 Candypop Buds (Queen, Ivory and
Violet) and 2 Iridescent Flint Beetles, which will give you Nectar and, if hit
3 times before being allowed to disappear, pools of spray.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 6

#015 Growshroom (Fungus), 5 Pikmin, 50 Pokos.
#107 Princess Pearl (Pearl earring), 5 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

Sublevel 6 is filled with beasts: 2 Wollywogs, many Water Dumples and lots of
Anode Beetles.  Electricity and water are also dangers here.  Begin by slowly
picking off the beasts closest, being careful around electricity.  Anode
Beetles can be rendered practically useless by throwing purples around.  One of
the Wollywogs, best to kill by swarming, contains Princess Pearl, while the
other treasure is always in the same place in a room you may remember from
Submerged Castle's second sublevel.  It's the one with the mushroom treasure, a
rusty pipe, the cave and a pool.  Walk around the left side and throw Blue
Pikmin over to the treasure to carry it back to the Research Pod.

If it's too difficult to defeat the beasts without losing any Pikmin, kill a
few of the Water Dumples off with your Captains first, then take some purples
around and throw them onto the Wollwogs and Anode Beetles like crazy (you need
some Yellow Pikmin as well, for the electricity generators).

There is almost always a path to every part of the sublevel without water; just
look around.  You can leave some of the beasts (those that aren't on your
Pikmin's route back with treasures): killing everything is unnecessary and
gains you nothing.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 7

#029 Impenetrable Cookie (Clockwise-whirled dark brown biscuit that rises into
     a peak), 8 Pikmin, 25 Pokos.
#158 Fuel Reservoir (Duracell 9V battery), 8 Pikmin, 120 Pokos.

On the next floor down, there is poison in the form of poison pipes, Withering
and Puffy Blowhogs, black- and white gates and Cloaking Burrow-nits.  Because
the sublevel is so large, many of the rooms have no treasure; this means you
can skip them.  Eliminate rooms from your to-do list by checking with the
Treasure Gauge, and then clear the ones that do have treasure.

Impenetrable Cookie is found inside one of the Puffy Blowhogs - kill this by
throwing Pikmin at it.  If a Puffy Blowhog blows at your Pikmin from behind a
gate, your Pikmin will (should...) be able to stay put once they start working
on it.  There are no real hazards, so take all of your Pikmin wherever you go.
Swarm the Cloaking Burrow-nits, be careful of the Withering Blowhogs, collect
the battery treasure and find the cave.  All the while, watch for eggs and the
goodness they contain.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 8

#167 Empty Space Container (White, circular tin of fish), 20 Pikmin, 130 Pokos.

You're in for a shock.  Dwarf Red Bulborbs are absolutely everywhere, even
though there are a number of large rooms.  The tiled theme is back, and the
rooms are square; luckily there's no water...yet.  To make things hard, there
are 2 Gatling Groinks out and about, and they can go pretty much anywhere; no
abyss, however, makes getting rid of them harder.

Of course, it's possible to simply ignore them - neither contain treasures, and
their projectiles aren't very effective (at least from a distance).  But it is
hard to ignore the 2 giant chicken-like beasts' waddling sounds and the
explosions they create, and even harder when you realise that they aim for you
and your Pikmin from quite a distance, waddling over to kill.

One way to keep them in check is to lead them to your Pikmin, but then go
behind a wall: they will shoot at you continually, but will not be able to harm
you, and are not clever enough to walk around the long way.  This gives you a
chance to take Purple Pikmin around another route, killing Dwarf Red Bulborbs
as you go and collecting treasure.  By moving close to the other side of the
wall, you can make the Gatling Groinks ignore anything else, even Pikmin
sneaking up behind them, or just going past with treasure.  To defeat them,
throw Pikmin on their back, preferably while the other is somewhere else, then
return them to the Research Pod or go to the next sublevel.

Find the single treasure (yes, just one...) and the cave, then go down to the
next floor.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 9

#126 Maternal Sculpture (Baby bottle top), 15 Pikmin, 55 Pokos.
#131 Wiggle Noggin (Cat's head on a spring), 15 Pikmin, 85 Pokos.

There is little land here, only a large room with a pool, another tiny room
leading off of the main one.  All the beasts fly - a Bumbling Snitchbug and
Careening Dirigibugs - and there are also poison pipes around.  It's actually
quite easy going on this level - just ignore the Bumbling Snitchbug and kill
the other 2 beasts quickly by throwing Pikmin on, whistling them off if the
bomb rock lands too near.

Wiggle Noggin and Maternal Sculpture are easy to locate and collect, and the
cave is in the second, much smaller room.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 10

#130 Silencer (Bald doll's head), 20 Pikmin, 670 Pokos.

You're on the final floor now - and you know what that means.  The boss here is
the Segmented Crawbster, and is moderately difficult to defeat for that last
treasure.  Take all of your Pikmin into the arena where battle will take place
and walk forwards until a shadow appears.  Walk left or right (your choice) so
that you are between the falling boss and a wall, and then spray your Pikmin
with an Ultra-spicy Spray.

What follows next is the beast's attack.  It will roll up into a ball after
having located you and your Pikmin, then roll towards the wall.  Move out of
the way, and the Segmented Crawbster will hit the wall and lay upside-down,
flashing, bulbous stomach showing.  The best way to avoid the boulders that
fall is to swarm your Pikmin squad around the boss, so that you are on its side
opposite the wall, just under what is probably a head.

Proceed to position the Captain under control just to the side of the boss, as
quickly as possible.  The distance is important - so that the Pikmin get up
onto the top, not hit its side and bounce off onto the floor.  Throw the Pikmin
up as quickly as you can manage.  A single Ultra-bitter Spray is good enough to
win in one round of battle if you act quickly; if you have none, or don't want
to waste any, whistle your Pikmin off as the Segmented Crawbster begins to
rise, and run to the opposite wall, repeating the same feat as at the start of
the battle.

Although it depends on your speed, the sprays you use, the Pikmin you have and
how many make it up on top of the beast each time, expect a battle that lasts
no more than 3 rounds.  Collect the very expensive treasure (670 Pokos) and
leave the cave.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.3.13. Hole of Heroes
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Location: Wistful Wild
To find: Blue Pikmin, Yellow Pikmin

As you leave the area with the Onions, take the right path, over the metal path
along the wall.  Defeat the Hermit Crawmad in the water and demolish the gate
behind.  Past that, you'll find a few beasts that might need to be disposed of,
and an electric fence at the far end, which you need to pass.  Being careful of
the Armored Cannon Beetle Larva, walk along the fallen bamboo (pipes?) to drop
down to the cave at the end.

It is important to have a lot of Purple Pikmin here, as the Hole of Heroes
features numerous bosses (most of which you've already fought).  Take in a fair
selection of the other colours, though there's no need for more than 20 of any
type except blues, which will come in useful in large numbers a couple of times
in the cave.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 1

#022 Corpulent Nut (Big fat acorn), 8 Pikmin, 80 Pokos.

The Hole of Heroes starts out as tame as the Awakening Wood, and similar in
appearance too.  Watch out for the hidden beasts: Creeping Chrysanthemums and
Shearwigs - and the not-so-well-hidden Cloaking Burrow-nits...  Dwarf Orange
Bulborbs also fall from the sky, making it not so Awakening Wood-like.
Everything can be easily taken care of by throwing a load of purples to stun,
then swarming.  You're looking for just the one treasure, so continue once it's
been collected.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 2

#112 Essence of True Love (Sapphire in bronze square), 5 Pikmin, 60 Pokos.

Start by getting rid of the Careening Dirigibugs, as they pose the greatest
threat.  Run up and throw a Pikmin onto one immediately, and it'll fall without
ever producing a bomb rock, and you can swarm it.  The Anode Beetles are the
second threat: you could just use yellows, but by far the easiest method of
disposal is waiting until it's safe to throw Purple Pikmin in, then swarm them
all together.  The Snitchbugs don't really pose a threat and can be ignored; so
proceed, then, to attack the Antenna Beetle by stunning it with a purple when
it lands, then attacking with all your other Pikmin.

Now it is possible to find the sublevel's one piece of treasure.  This is
buried, probably behind a gate.  Be careful of the bomb rock or two that might
randomly fall along the way, near eggs or treasure.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 3

#122 Love Sphere (Small yellow marble), 1 Pikmin, 85 Pokos.

We move on, now, to the hazardous areas of the cave.  Volatile Dweevils can
drop anywhere, and there are a few Withering Blowhogs along with a Puffy one.
Ground-based Blowhogs are around too, in both Watery and Fiery varieties, so be
cautious.  As long as you're ready to run from a walking explosion at any time,
Purple Pikmin can handle the whole sublevel with ease: just throw them around
and they'll stun and destroy all the beasts.

Again, there's only one treasure for all that killing, and it's easy to miss,
usually found behind one of the gates.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 4

#056 Lustrous Element (Gold coin), 10 Pikmin, 1000 Pokos.

The stream of bosses finally begins.  This sublevel's is the Pileated Snagret,
previously one of my least favourite Pikmin 2 enemies to battle; and this time,
it's made harder by the sloping ground.  What's more, there's a Burrowing
Snagret to contend with in the same arena; however, the position of this enemy
is more fixed, so you can just fight the boss on the other side of the room
once you've located the Burrowing Snagret.

The boss can be killed by throwing Pikmin on its head as soon as it emerges; if
enough attach themselves and attack, it will burrow back underground without
attacking.  However, due to the large amount of life it has, it is a good idea
to complement this strategy with sprays - either one or even both.  When the
creature emerges with more of a struggle than usual - which, thankfully, occurs
more often than with the Burrowing Snagret - swarm its protruding beak before
appears fully, perhaps petrifying it too.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 5

This is a rest level, devoid of harmful enemies and treasures, and provides a
route out via the geyser if you came ill-prepared or are finding the going too
tough.  But you won't quit now, will you?  Attack the innocent Unmarked
Spectralids and Honeywisps for vast quantities of Nectar and sprays, and use
the Queen Candypop Bud if you want to, then go to the next sublevel.  (I
expressly forbid the use of the geyser...)
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 6

#168 Stringent Container (White corned beef tin), 12 Pikmin, 130 Pokos.

Wateriness...

Don't worry, you don't have to have brought many blues if you're lucky with the
layout - though they do, of course, help.  You start in the middle, on a stump,
amidst all sorts of watery creatures; there is one treasure, usually
nearby and accessible over land, large and hard to miss.  The only real threats
are the Wollywogs, and maybe Water Dumples if they're near the treasure.
There are a couple of Hermit Crawmads, but they're small and weak, and pose
little actual possibility of a massacre.

Wollywogs, if on land, are easily gotten rid of with purples, and you shouldn't
have to attack any in water.  The cave needs unblocking to provide passage to
the next floor down; use the Lapis Lazuli Candypop Buds if you lack Blue Pikmin
and proceed.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 7

#115 Joyless Jewel (Silver ring with green heart), 5 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

Another boss from previous explorations: the Ranging Bloyster.  This time,
there's more room to manoeuvre, but there are Cannon Beetles of both varieties
lining the edges of this large square area.  Begin by defeating these, using
Captains to lure them into killing themselves and each other if you want to
remain on the safe side.  Note also that boulders fall in places here, and that
the Cannon Beetles' rocks cannot harm the Bloyster.  As for the boss, I'll copy
my strategy from the first encounter:

Separate the Captains, giving one the Pikmin, then get close to the boss with
the Pikminless Captain, whom I will call Louie for the sake of ease.  Notice
the Ranging Bloyster's tail-bud turn blue, along with its eyes, and that it
begins to move towards Louie.  Switch to Olimar and the colours will change to
red, the target to him.  Take Louie around the side opposite to Olimar, and
wait until the boss faces him.  At that point, switch Captains twice, so that
you have control of Louie still, and then switch back to Olimar just as the
boss turns red.

If timed correctly, this will confuse the Ranging Bloyster, who will turn blue
and then red again before beginning to even turn around or shake off the Pikmin
that should, by now, have been thrown onto the bud on its back by Olimar.  Just
a single attack should be enough to defeat the boss; if not, repeat the process
once more.  This leaves the treasure behind; collect it and head downwards.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 8

This is another rest sublevel with a variety of Candypop Buds, though there is
a Bulbmin to look out for.  Move on.  (Where do you think you're going?  Not
the geyser, the cave!)
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 9

#161 Patience Tester (Tin of water chestnuts), 20 Pikmin, 130 Pokos.

It's Grub-dog madness in here.  The next (and only other) room contains a range
of dangerous beasts - the kind with big teeth.  The best means of passing by
this sublevel without suffering tremendous losses is to lure the larger beasts
together, unleash an Ultra-bitter spray and rush in there with supercharged
Pikmin.  If this is not an available option, pick them off carefully, one by
one, luring them away separately to your waiting Pikmin hoard nearby if it's
easier.  This is a difficult sublevel to complete unscathed, so take your time
and don't be afraid of resetting.

By far the biggest threat is the Spotty Bulbear.  Be aware that it can walk
over the gate when it has been two-thirds demolished and notices you from far
away.  Try to get rid of it before the others; don't forget that it can revive,
coming back to life after dying if left unwatched for too long.  Next comes the
Orange Bulborb, which can wake up if you're close by; and then the smaller
Breadbugs.

Finally, the Fiery Bulblax: it can be harmed and stunned by Purple Pikmin, but
they will run around in flames; attack with them if you can save them from
burning up in time.  Use the stun period to take it down with reds after; if
not, use a spray to freeze it instead.  The Fiery Bulblax is the beast with the
treasure, and it's likely that you can ignore the Red and Hairy Bulborbs if
they're not in the path back to the Research Pod.  Collect that treasure and
find the cave, which should be behind a gate.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 10

#154 Treasured Gyro Block (White Nintendo block), 5 Pikmin, 80 Pokos.

Very easy if you have 8 Purple Pikmin.  Go into the other room without any
Pikmin and walk around to uncover two sets of Mitites - we don't want them
turning our calm, collected tools of war into chickens of...er...headlessness.
Return to the Pikmin and separate the purples you need; wait for everything in
the other room to settle, then enter.  You can see the eyes of the 2 Emperor
Bulblaxes: stand to one side and throw the Pikmin directly at one set rapidly
and wait for it to die; simply repeat, collect the treasure one of them left
behind and leave.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 11

#153 Favorite Gyro Block (Blue Nintendo block), 5 Pikmin, 80 Pokos.

Empress Bulblax, just like your encounter at the Frontier Cavern, only this
time you start at the Bulborb-larva-producing end.  Start by giving one Captain
all the Pikmin, and attacking the first Bulborb Larva with the other.  Switch
and begin to walk to the other end, switching back and killing a Bulborb Larva
every time one is...ejected.  Break down the gate and attack, retreating to the
alcove you opened up when the Empress rolls with your Pikmin, and killing the
Bulborb Larvae at the other end again.  Repeat, collect the treasure and move
onwards.

Oh, and be sure not to let Olimar get bitten.  Those little blobs sure do have
a strong bite.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 12

#152 Lost Gyro Block (Green Nintendo block), 5 Pikmin, 80 Pokos.

A third rest level.  Queen Candypop Bud, Doodlebug for sprays (use Purple
Pikmin), cave.  Oh, and the Iridescent Glint Beetle hidden somewhere contains
the treasure.  I want to see NO GEYSER USAGE.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 13

#151 Memorable Gyro Block (Yellow Nintendo block), 5 Pikmin, 80 Pokos.

Activate the Man-at-Legs in the centre of the level by attacking it with Blue
Pikmin, and have the rest hidden near the Research Pod, as distant as possible.
The basic strategy requires that you attack when it sinks low with deep breaths
(it breathes...), then whistle your Pikmin back before they are shaken off.
Proceed to find cover to hide behind while the enemy shoots at your Pikmin -
anything that provides a barrier between you and it will do.  As it likes to
stay around the watery area, blues are really the only option; all in all, this
is a fairly easy battle and shouldn't take long.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 14

#150 Fond Gyro Block (Red Nintendo block), 5 Pikmin, 80 Pokos.

Ready for Dweevils?  They're everywhere: ignore the smaller ones (use Purple
Pikmin if they MUST die) and search for the Beady Long Legs using the Treasure
Gauge.  Attack with Yellow Pikmin, trying to keep it away from water as far as
is possible; throw them on at every possible moment, whistling before they are
rejected, as they're safer on the body than on the ground.

With the treasure where it belongs, continue to sublevel 15.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 15

#149 Remembered Old Buddy (ROB head), 20 Pikmin, 250 Pokos.

This is the final floor, and you'll fight the Raging Long Legs, yet another
Dweevil.  There is no preferable type of Pikmin, so take a load through,
flowered-up using the eggs available nearby; maybe even take all 100 ('cause
you haven't lost any, right..?).  Head down the path to the arena and wander
about until the boss lands; you can kill some Jellyfloats beforehand if you
think it'll help.

Firstly, the safest place for your Pikmin is definitely the body, and it's not
hard to miss.  The strategy is basically the same as for the Beady Long Legs,
but things get a bit messier because its feet are so much bigger that it's hard
to whistle Pikmin away without squishification.  It is actually quite quick and
simple to use a group of perhaps 15 purples, and simply keep throwing and
whistling, so that they're practically always attacking.  An Ultra-spicy spray
makes this even easier.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.3.14. Dream Den
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Location: Wistful Wild
To find: Blue Pikmin, White Pikmin

To get to the entrance of the Dream Den, there are two routes; the following
is, perhaps, the easier.  Going left and up the ramp as you walk out into the
level, build the bridge if not yet done.  Continue to break down the black
poison gate on the other side of the water with White Pikmin, then defeat the
few enemies past it.  The cave is just a bit further forwards, where there are
some eggs that you can use to flower up your Pikmin.

I recommend a fair few purples - perhaps more than 30 - along with not many
more than 10 whites, more than 20 blues and as many reds and yellows as make
you feel safe.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 1

#005 Disguised Delicacy (Half of a kiwi fruit), 15 Pikmin, 40 Pokos.

We're outside.  The threats are many Dwarf Orange Bulborbs scattered around in
groups, a couple of Hermit Crawmads and 2 Lesser Spotted Jellyfloats.  None of
these pose any real problem, especially if you have the 30+ Purple Pikmin, so
just throw until they're dead, and swarm the Hermit Crawmads.  There is a bit
of poison around; only bother with it if it's between you and the treasure, or
just carry it with White Pikmin.  Collect it, open up the cave and continue
down.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 2

#066 Manual Honer (Red circular pencil sharpener), 10 Pikmin, 130 Pokos.
#067 Implement of Toil (Short 'Nintendo 64' pencil with both ends sharpened),
     2 Pikmin, 55 Pokos.

Toybox time again.  This sublevel is only dangerous because of the Gatling
Groink high up on a toy tower; other hazards are Snow Bulborbs and one sleeping
Hairy Bulborb.  It is easiest to reach the height required with Yellow Pikmin,
but any can make it.  Purple Pikmin can be used to stun the beast, so that it
doesn't turn around and attack.  Walk in front of the Groink, wait until it
begins to shoot, and quickly run around and up the ramp, throwing the purples
behind it.  If you're lucky enough that they stun it, it shouldn't take long to
kill.

Once it is dead, you should return the body to the Research Pod, unless you can
move quickly.  Proceed to kill the Bulborbs with thrown or swarmed Pikmin and
collect the two treasures.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 3

#147 Glee Spinner (Controller analogue stick), 6 Pikmin, 140 Pokos.

In this sublevel, there is electricity, poison and bomb rocks to watch out for.
Dwarf Bulbears and the one Spotty Bulbear pose the biggest threat, especially
seeing as they can fall at random.  The Careening Dirigibugs can be easily
picked off with a few thrown Pikmin; next, wander around with purples (you can
squeeze past the poison and wait for any electricity to stop to pass it),
killing the smaller Bulbears on the way, until the Treasure Gauge indicates
you're near a treasure - this is where the larger Bulbear falls.  Get ready to
attack as soon as it lands, preferably with a spray of Ultra-bitter.

If the situation turns bad, throw some Purple Pikmin onto the ground near the
beast to stun it quickly, so you can work out what to do.  When throwing
purples at any time, be careful of falling bomb rocks: if they hit one, it'll
explode instantly, which is kind of bad.  The sublevel's only treasure is in
the Spotty Bulbear, of course.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 4

#057 Mirrored Element (Silver coin), 10 Pikmin, 300 Pokos.

This may look scary, but it can be quite easily dealt with.  Anode Beetles and
loads of Armored Cannon Beetle Larvae are on this platform.  With a group of
15-25 purples descend the ramp around, defeating the Cannon Beetles on the way.
Do this by simply throwing them all on quickly, stunning the beast before it
can attack.  Be careful, however, of the Pikmin bouncing off and over into the
abyss: try to throw them on the side furthest from the edge.  If it has already
begun to attack, it can still be stunned in time, but it could be safer to move
to the side before attacking.

Anode Beetles can be just as easily dealt with by waiting until there's no
electricity then throwing.  The poison pipes can be squeezed past without
trouble, or it's possible simply to lure the Cannon Beetles into destroying
them with their boulders.

The treasure and cave are often found at the furthest points from where you
start.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 5

#006 Insect Condo (Big red apple with stalk), 15 Pikmin, 40 Pokos.

VERY fiery.  Red Pikmin are not required, but could make everything easier by
removing the need to avoid the fire.  Purples, of course, may be the better
option for most of the level, using C to make them dodge the hazard, or
throwing a few on when there's no fire to break the vent.  If using purples, 15
is enough and more would be hard to keep properly under control.

Defeat the Fiery Blowhogs, Red Bulborbs and Withering Blowhog by throwing
Pikmin.  For the treasure-containing Fiery Bulblax, Purple Pikmin CAN be used,
but it's difficult and recommended against.  If you use fewer than 20 Red
Pikmin, I would recommend that you power them up with an Ultra-spicy Spray
before throwing them on the fiery beast's back.  Remember, of course, to
whistle them away and reapply if the Bulblax has a chance to bite.

Alternatively, this enemy can be quite easily lured off the platform and to its
death: wake it up with a Captain and lead it to one of the holes somewhere
around, walking past it yourself and standing on the other side.  The treasure
will appear momentarily, near where it fell.  Collect this, the Insect Condo,
and continue on your journey down the Dream Den.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 6

#053 Future Orb (Ornament with a glass sphere and gold base), 25 Pikmin, 200
     Pokos.

This is the same sublevel as that of the Pileated Snagret in Snagret Hole,
except there are 4 Armored Cannon Beetle Larvae and a Lesser- and Greater
Spotted Jellyfloat to contend with instead.  A Jellyfloat contains the
treasure.  It is easy and safe, here, to take all of your Pikmin out to fight;
stay near the wall and walk around the edge disposing of each Cannon Beetle in
turn, then attack the other beasts.  Afterwards, open up a few of the gates
around the level to find an egg or two for Nectar, then find the cave behind
another.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 7

#113 Essence of Desire (Amethyst in gold square), 8 Pikmin, 90 Pokos.

This is the sublevel of floating beasts.  There are lots of a number of
varieties of these in two small rooms, making it difficult to get at the
treasure.  It's tough to avoid being picked up, blown about and blown up at the
same time.  The best method is to pick them off one by one, perhaps luring them
away from the main group, with a small number of Pikmin.  It might be a good
idea to aim for the 4 Careening Dirigibugs first, as they are the only ones
with the capacity to kill Pikmin.

The treasure is in one of the Puffy Blowhogs, so it's possible to collect it
without killing anything else.  Using purples makes it even easier, as their
great mass causes them to be unaffected by the beast blowing at them.  You will
also need Pikmin to open up the cave, as it is covered over with rock.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 8

#043 Possessed Squash (Carved orange gourd), 30 Pikmin, 180 Pokos.
#127 Extreme Perspirator (Pink doll), 15 Pikmin, 150 Pokos.

This is an Angle Maze-type sublevel, with its sandiness, grey stone and
maze-like layout.  You begin in the centre; the enemies are small Dweevils of
all colours and an Antenna Beetle, and many hazards are found along the paths.
Begin by walking around and destroying any electric beams with your Yellow
Pikmin, effectively removing the only truly lethal hazard of the sublevel for
even an alert Captain.  Proceed, then, to walk around with a group of Purple
Pikmin, attacking all the Dweevils, fire vents and the Antenna Beetle; you can
avoid any poison by walking around the small gaps to the side, or walking
through while whistling your Pikmin.  This is all done by simply throwing them
on quickly with good timing.  Finally, use White Pikmin to get rid of the
poison hazards and collect the treasures, perhaps with some help from the rest
of your Pikmin for the latter.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 9

This is a rest level before the hard part begins.  No treasure, just that
familiar soothing music, lots of greenery, and 2 Doodlebugs and an Iridescent
Flint Beetle.  Use the beasts for loads of Nectar and a total of one red and 4
purple sprays, which can be easily manipulated into giving 2 and 8.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 10

#142 Talisman of Life (Box with a portrait on), 15 Pikmin, 90 Pokos.

This is not a sublevel I like, primarily because I only had 15 Blue Pikmin in
the cave last time I played through the game.  The treasure, usually over water
and requiring 15 Pikmin plus the defeat of a Lesser Spotted Jellyfloat and
probably the Gatling Groink, necessitates 15 blues, and it is preferable to
have 25 or more.  Begin by walking down the tree stump's root onto dry land and
hiding your Pikmin in the alcove to the right.  Defeat any enemies on land
there by swarming (Fiery Bulborbs, Wollywog, Water Dumples and Lesser Spotted
Jellyfloats are the possibilities), then take your blues out into the water.

Locate the Gatling Groink and try to lead it away from any Water Dumples (they
act far too hungrily...), dodging its attacks all the while, before petrifying
it and throwing all the Pikmin onto its back; recall that it will revive once
dead.  With that out of the way, search for the Jellyfloat containing the
treasure and defeat it; defeat any beasts on the way back to the Research Pod
by throwing Pikmin, then continue down to sublevel 11.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 11

#140 Boss Stone (Wooden slab with a Japanese character), 8 Pikmin, 110 Pokos.
#173 Yellow Taste Tyrant (Yellow 'French's' lid), 15 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.

The idea here is a lot of relatively weak beasts put together to make the going
tougher.  Poison blocks off all the paths initially, so remove it.  Proceed,
then, to walk into one of the rooms and attack whatever's there.  It is a good
idea to go all out and swarm everything: Cloaking Burrow-nits, multiple Blowhog
variants, Dwarf Bulbears, a Breadbug and a Bumbling Snitchbug.  Alternatively,
a small squad of Purples is just as effective when thrown all around the room.

There are only two treasures, none of them in beasts, so you may have only to
clear one of the two hazard-filled areas here.  The hole to continue is, again,
encased in rock.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 12

#119 Universal Com (Silver ring with blue square), 5 Pikmin, 100 Pokos.
#164 Endless Repository (Red and yellow tin of fish), 20 Pikmin, 130 Pokos.

This sublevel is not too difficult, if the enemies are spread out enough.
Begin by eliminating any poison pipes nearby with White Pikmin, then defeating
the enemies closest.  If an Antenna Beetle ever lands very close to you, swarm
it or throw purples to stun so that it cannot blow its whistle.  Two Wollywogs
and two Orange Bulborbs are the only other enemies, and there are falling
boulders to be wary of.  In one room, poison is spread all over.

For the Orange Bulborbs, the use of Purple Pikmin is preferable: simply throw
them on their backs.  If one wakes up before you attack, throw a few at the
ground near it to stun it, as it will be too high up to stun as easily from
those thrown at it.  One treasure is in one of these two beasts, while the
other is under the ground, behind a gate.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 13

#176 Alien Billboard ('Kiwi' shoe polish lid), 15 Pikmin, 80 Pokos.

The cave's penultimate level can be a relatively easy or a very tricky one;
this is mostly dependent on the locations of the 5 Bulborbs here: whether they
are together or split up.  Aim to attack those closest to you without waking
any of the others; it is useful to lure one away with a Captain to attack it at
a distance from the rest.  There is just one treasure, in one of the beasts.
Of course, using purples and/or sprays makes this a much easier affair; bearing
in mind that you are most likely very near the end of the game, you won't have
much use for either after this.

If you ever manage to wake them all up and have Bulborbs coming in from all
sides, a massacre waiting to happen, use an Ultra-bitter Spray and rotate
immediately to cover almost an entire rotation and freeze everything if you're
lucky.  Then swarm for loads of Nectar.
_______________________________________________________________________________

Sublevel 14

#197 Shock Therapist (Wide electric bulb with a stand), 30 Pikmin, 1000 Pokos.
#198 Flare Cannon (Red camping stove), 30 Pikmin, 1000 Pokos.
#199 Comedy Bomb (Purple mock-bomb), 30 Pikmin, 1000 Pokos.
#200 Monster Pump (Water tap with a gauge), 30 Pikmin, 1000 Pokos.
#201 King of Bugs (Louie), 1 Pikmin, 10 Pokos.

This is it.  The final battle.  (At least, it should be, really.  It isn't
necessarily the last 5 treasures for everyone, though.)

There are a number of ways to go about coming out of this fight with all of
your Pikmin, but first, go into the arena and make your presence known to the
Titan Dweevil.  It is, now, the most popular course of action to remove all
non-Yellow Pikmin to the relative safety of the alcove the exit geyser is in,
and not without good cause.  The reasoning is two-fold: the boss is high up, so
yellows are best-suited to reach it, and its electricity-based weapon, the only
thing that will bring about an instant kill, is ineffective against them.

You can see quite clearly four peculiar instruments on the beast's body: these
are treasures, used as weapons against you by the Dweevil.  The aim for the
moment is to remove these by throwing your Pikmin onto them.  I will say now
that petrification does work, but is not overly effective as it reduces the
damage taken by the weapons.  Ultra-spicy Sprays are very useful here, however,
and it is well worth it to use all that you have in this battle.

Begin by going after the tap, the water-based weapon; throw your Pikmin onto
it and they will attack.  Aiming properly can be difficult, what with all that
Dweevil in the way and with it moving about; try to stand directly underneath
the target.  Every so often, the boss will shake off Pikmin and attack with a
random weapon: fire, electricity, poison or water:

If it is fire, run away and then, once it starts, run around behind the boss
and attack whatever you can from there, seeing as the flame cannot rotate fully
and is locked into a set path of motion after it begins.

If it is poison, run.  Try to get out of the arena until it stops.

If it is water, switch Captains and wait it out, whistling any Pikmin that get
hit there and then switching back, repeating the whistling process back in the
arena.  It is this capability to reach all of your Pikmin that makes the tap
our first target.

If it is electricity, ignore it.  Replace your Pikmin on whatever they were
attacking.  Note that Captains are temporarily immobilised by all four of these
attacks, but not at all damaged.  The fire is by far the worst for Captains,
rendering them immobile until the attack stops, unless you mash the buttons
enough to get back on your feet quickly.

Move on, next, to fire or poison, then the other, then electricity.  If you
fear that you will lose all of your yellows, remove the electricity first, then
bring all but Purple Pikmin into the battle (their low mobility is hard to cope
with here).  After the removal of all four implements of doom, attack with all
Pikmin: the boss is now incapable of killing any, only swiping at them to throw
them off.  All 5 treasures, 4 worth 1000 Pokos and the fifth an unconscious
Louie, can be collected after the long battle, and the cave exited.  You win!

Of course, if you have fewer than 3 Purple Pikmin or 30 of any other colour
left by now, it's time to restart.  But then, you shouldn't have so few after
using my guide...
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.4. Exploration Kit
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

These are 14 treasures that are special, in that they give you more than just
a treasure.  They comprise The Key, King of Bugs and those treasures in the
Exploration Kit.  Here, I will not describe how to get them, but in what ways
they do more than simply earn Pokos.  To find out how to get the treasures,
simply search (Ctrl + F for search box) for its number, with the # symbol,
just as they are here.  The numbers appear where the strategy for the treasure
is (above), where all of the treasures in the game are listed (below) and here.

The Exploration Kit is made up of 12 treasures.  It is what the 2 Pikmin
Captains carry around with them, to give them certain skills they did not have
before.  Each treasure gives the player a new attribute, which aids in
completing the game (as well as adding to the total combined treasure value
of the treasures collected).  Most of them come from defeating bosses, at the
end of caves; however, not all bosses contain one of these, and they do not
all come from bosses.

They will be displayed here as shown:

Exploration Kit #/Name
Treasure #/Name
Description of what it does

#1 Mega Tweeter
#194 Amplified Amplifier
This device, being an amplifier, allows the sound from your whistle to travel
further.  The ring shown on the screen increases in size, allowing more distant
Pikmin to hear it.

#2 Pluckaphone
#195 Professional Noisemaker
Probably the most useful, in my view, is the Pluckaphone.  The word 'pluck' is
very relevant: this treasure enables you to simply whistle at Pikmin sprouts to
pluck them out of the ground.

#3 Solar System
#190 Stellar Orb
The Solar System, though not the most wonderful of treasures, does help in one
way.  Its job is, seeing as it is a light bulb, to light up caves.  Once it is
collected, the darkness underground goes away and everywhere is as light as on
the surface.

#4 Metal Suit Z
#193 Justice Alloy
This is helpful to those who like to attack enemies with Olimar or Louie rather
than with Pikmin, in order to protect them.  This is because it provides a
more resilient spacesuit, meaning that any beasts' attacks do far less damage
than without the upgrade.

#5 Scorch Guard
#191 Forged Courage
The Scorch Guard is the first of the hazard-protecting treasures.  With its
strong metal that has a high level of resistance to heat, the Captains become
resistant to fire themselves, be it from beasts or vents in the ground.

#6 Anti-Electrifier
#192 Dream Material
The second treasure that protects Olimar and Louie from hazards, the
Anti-electrifier's name is somewhat self-explanatory.  Obviously, immunity to
electricity follows the collection of this treasure, due to it being made of
a material that is an electrical insulator.

#7 Rush Boots
#189 Repugnant Appendage
The form of the Rush Boots is a pink baby shoe.  It enables Olimar and Louie to
run faster; with this, their speed increases to be the same as that of the
White Pikmin when flower-topped.

#8 Rocket Fist
#188 Brute Knuckles
Finally, here is a treasure that helps the Captains fight, rather than protect
them more.  It gives them a third punch that uses a large black glove and an
arm as long as Olimar is high, which does much more damage than a normal punch
and is used by pressing A.  I called it a 'third punch' because it hits the
beast or Pellet Posy being attacked on every third punch when the button i
pressed rapidly.

#9 Treasure Gauge
#186 Prototype Detector
A very important piece of apparatus, the Treasure Gauge detects treasure to
produce a radar-like treasure-seeking effect.  It beeps more rapidly as you
near any treasure, be it buried or visible, and loses its colour in the absence
of treasure.  This applies when there is either no treasure left on a certain
sublevel in any cave or a certain above ground area.  To reap the full benefits
of this device, always check to see if it has become grey before going to the
next sublevel in a cave.  As a side note, even without the gauge, collecting
every treasure in a sublevel causes a sound effect to play; though of course,
this will never play on sublevels that never contained any treasure.

#10 Sphere Chart
#184 Spherical Atlas
Found underneath the Valley of Repose, this holds certain information that,
when translated, allows the ship to land in a new area.  The new area is
Awakening Wood.

#11 Survey Chart
#185 Geographic Projection
Similar to the one above, the Survey Chart, found in Awakening Wood, allows the
player to land in Perplexing Pool, a new area, the next day.

#12 Napsack
#187 Five-man Napsack
Pretty much the most useless treasure and one that never aided me: I used the
Napsack only once, to see what it did.  It allows the Captain being controlled
at the time, by pressing and holding X for a second, to fall asleep.  Any
Pikmin near him will return him to the Onion or Research Pod quickly, whereupon
he is sucked up like anything else and then released.  Any Pikmin that were
with the Captain upon falling asleep, excluding the 1 or 2 that carried him,
remain where he was, idle.  If no Pikmin were around to carry the Captain when
he fell asleep, press A to awaken him.  'Tis madness indeed.

Next, The Key:
#196 The Key
The Key, upon its collection, unlocks Challenge Mode.  This can be accessed
from the main menu on the title screen at any point from then.

Finally, Louie:
#201 King of Bugs
When Louie is rescued after being left on the Pikmin planet for a while, he
becomes a 'treasure', though worth only 10 Pokos, in that he must be stored in
the ship's cargo hold, with the other treasures: there is no room left in the
2 available passenger seats in the ship.  His rescue allows you to read his
notes on each beast from the Piklopedia, by pressing Y there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.4.5. Treasure list
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This section is in order to provide 3 things.  The first is the numbers of each
of the game's treasures.  Secondly, I aim to describe the treasures: I hope, in
doing this, to aid you in being sure that you have unearthed the correct
treasure; if not, put it back where you found it.  Lastly, locations are
provided.

Here, you will also find the values and weights of the treasures, which may be
helpful in planning a strategy as to which treasures to collect on which days.

Weight is in Pikmin, value is in Pokos.

     Name                   |Description     |Location            |Weight|Value
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
#001 Cupid's Grenade        |cherry          |Citadel of Spiders  |3     |20
#002 Sunseed Berry          |strawberry      |Awakening Wood      |5     |170
#003 Combustion Berry       |large strawberry|Snagret Hole        |12    |190
#004 Seed of Greed          |chestnut        |Wistful Wild        |10    |70
#005 Disguised Delicacy     |half a kiwi     |Dream Den           |15    |40
#006 Insect Condo           |big red apple   |Dream Den           |15    |40
#007 Citrus Lump            |squashed orange |Emergence Cave      |15    |180
#008 Spiny Alien Treat      |plant bulb/bud  |Valley of Repose    |4     |50
#009 Anxious Sprout         |bulb/sprout     |Bulblax Kingdom     |15    |50
#010 Child of the Earth     |potato          |Cavern of Chaos     |15    |40
#011 Love Nugget            |tomato          |Citadel of Spiders  |20    |40
#012 Infernal Vegetable     |jalapeo        |Cavern of Chaos     |12    |30
#013 Anti-hiccup Fungus     |fungus          |Wistful Wild        |5     |30
#014 Toxic Toadstool        |fungus          |White Flower Garden |5     |30
#015 Growshroom             |fungus          |Cavern of Chaos     |5     |50
#016 Onion Replica          |brown onion     |Perplexing Pool     |20    |30
#017 Science Project        |four-leaf clover|Snagret Hole        |1     |20
#018 Pilgrim Bulb           |plant bulb      |Awakening Wood      |10    |55
#019 Arboreal Frippery      |red Autumn leaf |Shower Room         |1     |10
#020 Conifer Spire          |pine cone       |Wistful Wild        |7     |15
#021 Armored Nut            |acorn           |Wistful Wild        |4     |60
#022 Corpulent Nut          |fat acorn       |Hole of Heroes      |8     |80
#023 Meat of Champions      |gammon steak    |Glutton's Kitchen   |10    |35
#024 Hideous Victual        |fried egg       |Glutton's Kitchen   |10    |100
#025 Meat Satchel           |small sausage   |Snagret Hole        |5     |40
#026 Taste Sensation        |iced brown cake |Snagret Hole        |15    |40
#027 Triple Sugar Threat    |sweet thing     |Snagret Hole        |6     |60
#028 Compelling Cookie      |light biscuit   |Submerged Castle    |3     |10
#029 Impenetrable Cookie    |dark biscuit    |Cavern of Chaos     |8     |25
#030 Bug Bait               |biscuit/cracker |Submerged Castle    |5     |15
#031 Imperative Cookie      |round biscuit   |Glutton's Kitchen   |5     |25
#032 Comfort Cookie         |square biscuit  |Submerged Castle    |4     |10
#033 Succulent Mattress     |square biscuit  |Submerged Castle    |8     |50
#034 King of Sweets         |brown sweet     |Citadel of Spiders  |5     |15
#035 Enamel Buster          |brown sweet     |Cavern of Chaos     |8     |60
#036 Diet Doomer            |pink sweet      |Submerged Castle    |5     |25
#037 Pale Passion           |pale sweet      |Submerged Castle    |5     |25
#038 White Goodness         |round sweet     |Glutton's Kitchen   |8     |60
#039 Chocolate Cushion      |iced doughnut   |Submerged Castle    |10    |40
#040 Sweet Dreamer          |iced doughnut   |Glutton's Kitchen   |10    |40
#041 Confection Hoop        |strip ring thing|Submerged Castle    |20    |60
#042 Pastry Wheel           |iced pastry coil|Submerged Castle    |10    |35
#043 Possessed Squash       |Carved gourd    |Dream Den           |30    |180
#044 Fossilized Ursidae     |wooden bear     |Valley of Repose    |25    |160
#045 Colossal Fossil        |some skull half |Bulblax Kingdom     |20    |140
#046 Leviathan Feather      |grey feather    |Snagret Hole        |1     |10
#047 Olimarnite Shell       |ammonite fossil |Bulblax Kingdom     |15    |40
#048 Fortified Delicacy     |seashell        |Perplexing Pool     |20    |60
#049 Scrumptious Shell      |half a shell    |Shower Room         |10    |60
#050 Memorial Shell         |half a shell    |Citadel of Spiders  |10    |100
#051 Mysterious Remains     |crab claw       |Snagret Hole        |8     |150
#052 Crystal King           |crystal         |Bulblax Kingdom     |10    |110
#053 Future Orb             |glass ornament  |Dream Den           |25    |200
#054 Gyroid Bust            |wooden ornament |Bulblax Kingdom     |10    |250
#055 Unknown Merit          |grey holed coin |Bulblax Kingdom     |5     |100
#056 Lustrous Element       |gold coin       |Hole of Heroes      |10    |1000
#057 Mirrored Element       |silver coin     |Dream Den           |10    |300
#058 Vorpal Platter         |tin can lid     |Shower Room         |12    |60
#059 Invigorator            |blue mug        |Glutton's Kitchen   |20    |130
#060 Milk Tub               |milk container  |Cavern of Chaos     |5     |60
#061 Merciless Extractor    |fruit strainer  |Shower Room         |20    |90
#062 Divine Cooking Tool    |saucepan        |Shower Room         |20    |90
#063 Utter Scrap            |crushed can     |Valley of Repose    |35    |170
#064 Decorative Goo         |blue paint tube |Awakening Wood      |10    |80
#065 Master's Instrument    |pink crayon     |Glutton's Kitchen   |4     |30
#066 Manual Honer           |pencil sharpener|Dream Den           |10    |130
#067 Implement of Toil      |short N64 pencil|Dream Den           |2     |55
#068 Heavy-duty Magnetizer  |horseshoe magnet|Snagret Hole        |10    |150
#069 Harmonic Synthesizer   |'clapper' (...) |Glutton's Kitchen   |10    |120
#070 Emperor whistle        |silver whistle  |Snagret Hole        |15    |75
#071 Director of Destiny    |broken compass  |Glutton's Kitchen   |20    |100
#072 Sud Generator          |bar of soap     |Shower Room         |20    |60
#073 Flame of Tomorrow      |Bowser matchbox |Citadel of Spiders  |10    |10
#074 Impediment Scourge     |bottle opener   |Perplexing Pool     |10    |50
#075 Time Capsule           |locket/dog image|Citadel of Spiders  |7     |70
#076 Lip Service            |lipstick        |Citadel of Spiders  |4     |50
#077 Mirrored Stage         |make-up thingy  |Shower Room         |15    |140
#078 Behemoth Jaw           |false teeth     |Shower Room         |20    |100
#079 Joy Receptacle         |wrapped present |Frontier Cavern     |15    |60
#080 Fleeting Art Form      |green candle    |Frontier Cavern     |2     |75
#081 Danger Chime           |bell            |Frontier Cavern     |10    |120
#082 Spouse Alert           |small bell      |Frontier Cavern     |10    |120
#083 Innocence Lost         |star decoration |Frontier Cavern     |15    |100
#084 Essential Furnishing   |Christmas bauble|Frontier Cavern     |5     |100
#085 Icon of Progress       |red stocking    |Frontier Cavern     |15    |85
#086 Temporal Mechanism     |pocket clock    |Valley of Repose    |30    |110
#087 Mystical Disc          |clock face      |Subterranean Complex|6     |75
#088 Vacuum Processor       |processor thing |Subterranean Complex|10    |100
#089 Indomitable CPU        |processor thing |Subterranean Complex|10    |100
#090 Network Mainbrain      |processor thing |Subterranean Complex|10    |100
#091 Space Wave Receiver    |black dial      |Subterranean Complex|10    |80
#092 Sulking Antenna        |antenna         |Glutton's Kitchen   |35    |150
#093 Nouveau Table          |phone dial ring |Subterranean Complex|25    |100
#094 Omega Flywheel         |cog/gear thing  |Subterranean Complex|20    |60
#095 Spirit Flogger         |cog/gear thing  |Subterranean Complex|20    |70
#096 Superstrong Stabiliser |small bolt      |Subterranean Complex|10    |60
#097 Repair Juggernaut      |bolt            |Subterranean Complex|20    |85
#098 Adamantine Girdle      |nut [mechanical]|Subterranean Complex|12    |70
#099 Massage Girdle         |nut [mechanical]|Perplexing Pool     |20    |100
#100 Superstick Textile     |'Gamma Tape'    |White Flower Garden |30    |80
#101 Exhausted Superstick   |'Gamma Tape'    |Subterranean Complex|12    |50
#102 Furious Adhesive       |red tape        |Subterranean Complex|10    |60
#103 Petrified Heart        |reddish crystal |White Flower Garden |5     |100
#104 Eternal Emerald Eye    |emerald on gold |Bulblax Kingdom     |20    |150
#105 Regal Diamond          |diamond         |Citadel of Spiders  |5     |100
#106 Tear Stone             |sapphire        |Bulblax Kingdom     |5     |150
#107 Princess Pearl         |pearl earring   |Cavern of Chaos     |5     |100
#108 Crystal Clover         |emeralds        |Bulblax Kingdom     |20    |150
#109 Unspeakable Wonder     |gold crown      |Valley of Repose    |30    |120
#110 Essence of Rage        |ruby on silver  |Frontier Cavern     |8     |70
#111 Essence of Despair     |emerald & silver|Cavern of Chaos     |6     |80
#112 Essence of True Love   |sapphire/bronze |Hole of Heroes      |5     |60
#113 Essence of Desire      |amethyst on gold|Dream Den           |8     |90
#114 Pink Menace            |pink/gold thing |Valley of Repose    |5     |100
#115 Joyless Jewel          |green heart     |Hole of Heroes      |5     |100
#116 Frosty Bauble          |blue square     |Cavern of Chaos     |5     |100
#117 Gemstar Wife           |blue star       |Cavern of Chaos     |5     |100
#118 Gemstar Husband        |green star      |Frontier Cavern     |5     |100
#119 Universal Com          |blue square     |Dream Den           |5     |100
#120 Omniscient Sphere      |orange marble   |Frontier Cavern     |1     |85
#121 Crystallized Telepathy |red marble      |Snagret Hole        |10    |120
#122 Love Sphere            |yellow marble   |Hole of Heroes      |1     |85
#123 Crystallised Telekinesis |yellow marble |Snagret Hole        |10    |120
#124 Mirth Sphere           |blue marble     |Cavern of Chaos     |1     |85
#125 Crystallized Clairvoyance|blue marble   |Snagret Hole        |10    |120
#126 Maternal Sculpture     |baby bottle top |Cavern of Chaos     |15    |55
#127 Extreme Perspirator    |pink doll       |Dream Den           |15    |150
#128 Rubber Ugly            |rubber duck     |Shower Room         |8     |90
#129 Paradoxical Enigma     |rubber duck head|Citadel of Spiders  |4     |80
#130 Silencer               |bald doll head  |Cavern of Chaos     |20    |670
#131 Wiggle Noggin          |cat bobblehead  |Cavern of Chaos     |15    |85
#132 Coiled Launcher        |spring          |Subterranean Complex|15    |70
#133 Magical Stage          |make-up thingy  |Glutton's Kitchen   |30    |150
#134 Flame Tiller           |red yo-yo       |Frontier Cavern     |20    |120
#135 Doomsday Apparatus     |blue dumbbell   |Wistful Wild        |1000  |3000
#136 Aquatic Mine           |bomb-type thing |Perplexing Pool     |3     |80
#137 Air Brake              |shuttlecock     |Awakening Wood      |15    |100
#138 Worthless Statue       |king chess piece|Frontier Cavern     |10    |80
#139 Priceless Statue       |queen piece     |Frontier Cavern     |10    |80
#140 Boss Stone             |wood slab thing |Dream Den           |8     |110
#141 Luck Wafer             |ace of spades   |Hole of Beasts      |1     |140
#142 Talisman of Life       |portrait on box |Dream Den           |15    |90
#143 Strife Monolith        |patterned tile  |Hole of Beasts      |12    |150
#144 Chance Totem           |ordinary die    |Awakening Wood      |5     |100
#145 Dream Architect        |Game & Watch    |Hole of Beasts      |20    |280
#146 Stone of Glory         |circular D-Pad  |Hole of Beasts      |5     |100
#147 Glee Spinner           |analogue stick  |Dream Den           |6     |140
#148 Cosmic Archive         |Famicom disk    |Hole of Beasts      |15    |230
#149 Remembered Old Buddy   |ROB head        |Hole of Heroes      |20    |250
#150 Fond Gyro Block        |red ROB block   |Hole of Heroes      |5     |80
#151 Memorable Gyro Block   |yellow ROB block|Hole of Heroes      |5     |80
#152 Lost Gyro Block        |green ROB block |Hole of Heroes      |5     |80
#153 Favorite Gyro Block    |blue ROB block  |Hole of Heroes      |5     |80
#154 Treasured Gyro Block   |white ROB block |Hole of Heroes      |5     |80
#155 Proton AA              |AA battery      |Submerged Castle    |6     |90
#156 Durable Energy Cell    |C battery       |Shower Room         |15    |160
#157 Courage Reactor        |D battery       |Valley of Repose    |20    |280
#158 Fuel Reservoir         |9V battery      |Cavern of Chaos     |8     |120
#159 Container of Knowledge |tin of sardines |Cavern of Chaos     |20    |130
#160 Container of Sea Bounty|tin of herring  |White Flower Garden |20    |130
#161 Patience Tester        |tin of chestnuts|Hole of Heroes      |20    |130
#162 Perfect Container      |tin of sardines |Subterranean Complex|20    |130
#163 Survival Container     |baking powder   |Glutton's Kitchen   |10    |130
#164 Endless Repository     |red & yellow tin|Dream Den           |20    |130
#165 Open Architecture      |tin of salmon   |Citadel of Spiders  |20    |130
#166 Permanent Container    |orange container|Shower Room         |20    |130
#167 Empty Space Container  |white fish tin  |Cavern of Chaos     |20    |130
#168 Stringent Container    |corned beef tin |Hole of Heroes      |12    |130
#169 Open Archive           |tin of beans    |Submerged Castle    |20    |130
#170 Nutrient Silo          |peanut butter   |White Flower Garden |15    |35
#171 Plentiful Tank         |jar of honey    |Shower Room         |8     |50
#172 Drone Supplies         |Haribo sweets   |Glutton's Kitchen   |15    |100
#173 Yellow Taste Tyrant    |yellow jar lid  |Dream Den           |15    |100
#174 Salivatrix             |blue jar lid    |Snagret Hole        |20    |30
#175 Gherkin Gate           |'Vlasic' jar lid|Perplexing Pool     |15    |100
#176 Alien Billboard        |shoe polish lid |Dream Den           |15    |80
#177 Hypnotic Platter       |bottle cap      |Awakening Wood      |4     |100
#178 Happiness Emblem       |white bottle cap|Shower Room         |4     |100
#179 Abstract Masterpiece   |blue bottle cap |Perplexing Pool     |4     |100
#180 Pondering Emblem       |red bottle cap  |Submerged Castle    |4     |30
#181 Activity Arouser       |bottle cap      |Citadel of Spiders  |4     |30
#182 Quenching Emblem       |'7up' bottle cap|Emergence Cave      |4     |100
#183 Drought Ender          |bottle cap      |White Flower Garden |4     |100
#184 Spherical Atlas        |globe (South)   |Emergence Cave      |101   |200
#185 Geographic Projection  |globe (North)   |Awakening Wood      |101   |200
#186 Prototype Detector     |love tester     |White Flower Garden |35    |200
#187 Five-man Napsack       |glove           |White Flower Garden |15    |100
#188 Brute Knuckles         |fist statue     |Frontier Cavern     |15    |100
#189 Repugnant Appendage    |pink baby shoe  |Frontier Cavern     |20    |100
#190 Stellar Orb            |small light bulb|Subterranean Complex|5     |100
#191 Forged Courage         |red metal man   |Bulblax Kingdom     |20    |100
#192 Dream Material         |half an eraser  |Glutton's Kitchen   |10    |100
#193 Justice Alloy          |blue metal man  |Snagret Hole        |20    |100
#194 Amplified Amplifier    |grey speaker    |Shower Room         |20    |100
#195 Professional Noisemaker|red megaphone   |Submerged Castle    |15    |100
#196 The Key                |gold key        |Citadel of Spiders  |1     |100
#197 Shock Therapist        |electric bulb   |Dream Den           |30    |1000
#198 Flare Cannon           |camping stove   |Dream Den           |30    |1000
#199 Comedy Bomb            |purple mock-bomb|Dream Den           |30    |1000
#200 Monster Pump           |water tap       |Dream Den           |30    |1000
#201 King of Bugs           |Louie           |Dream Den           |1     |10

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.5. Piklopedia
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Beasts always harm Louie and Olimar, hazards to the Captains that no treasures
can remove (though the damage taken can be lowered by the collection of Justice
Alloy).  There are 81 species of life in Pikmin 2 according to the Piklopedia,
63 of which are beasts, the remainder being plants; 12 of the beasts are
bosses.  Some beasts fly, some float and most remain on land.  They can eat,
crush, attack with explosions, poison, fire, electricity, water, boulders and
falling rocks, suck Pikmin up or pull them into holes.

When Pikmin are eaten, there is a small period of time in which they can be
regained before they are swallowed and die.  They can be saved by killing the
beast before it swallows; next, wait until the beast's ghost appears (always
roughly rounded, though variable in size) and the Pikmin should come out of the
body.  This fact is used in the strategy that defeats various beasts, in that
it does not matter if any are eaten, as they will come back.  You can always
tell if a Pikmin has died, as their ghost will appear; this remains the colour
and size of the Pikmin, and is more of a traditional 'ghost' shape.  When
various beasts eat Pikmin, there is a different time after which the Pikmin
will die, which varies by beast from immediately to a few seconds, and much
longer for Jellyfloats.

Note that Captains are harmed by certain beasts' electricity and fire even with
the protective treasures, if not as much.  This occurs because of the force
exerted upon them by the jet/beam.  There are some beasts that cannot kill
Pikmin, but plant them instead, and some that can immobilise a Captain by
picking him up in some way.  Whenever the latter happens, rotate the Analogue
Stick rapidly to escape.  Finally, Jellyfloats and Breadbugs have unique ways
of killing Pikmin.
(adapted from the 'Beasts' section of 'Hazards', section 4.1.1)

Here, I will describe beasts, plants and, as types of plant in the game,
Candypop Buds.

As with the treasures, I will not copy out any of Olimar or Louie's Notes for
any beasts or plants.  For a description of how to get Louie and Olimar's
Notes, see section 7.3, entitled 'Notes'.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.5.1. Plant list
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is a section of the guide that will not help in the game.  To add a plant
to the Piklopedia, a Captain or Pikmin must go near it, perhaps touch it.

Note that numbers 46 to 51 (inclusive), as listed in the Piklopedia, are the
Candypop Buds; therefore, they are in the next section, not here.

#58 Pellet Posy
Description: Straight flower with green stem, white petals a large Pellet in
             the flower's centre, which is coloured and numbered either 1, 5,
             10 or 20.
Locations: Valley of Repose, Awakening Wood, Perplexing Pool.

#59 Common Glowcap
Description: Cluster of three grey toadstool shapes whose heads glow with a
             white light.  Found only underground.
Locations: Frontier Cavern, Hole of Beasts, Bulblax Kingdom, Citadel of
           Spiders, Hole of Heroes.

#60 Clover
Description: Thin- and white-stemmed with 3 proportionally large green leaves
             at the top.
Locations: Awakening Wood, Emergence Cave, Frontier Cavern, Hole of Beasts,
           White Flower Garden, Snagret Hole, Citadel of Spiders, Shower Room,
           Cavern of Chaos, Hole of Heroes.

#61 Figwort
Description: Leafy plants with blue or deep pink-red flowers; also seen as
             short, variegated brown growths at the Valley of Repose.
Locations: Valley of Repose, Awakening Wood, Wistful Wild, Emergence Cave,
           Frontier Cavern, White Flower Garden, Bulblax Kingdom, Snagret Hole,
           Citadel of Spiders, Shower Room, Submerged Castle, Cavern of Chaos,
           Hole of Heroes, Dream Den.

#62 Dandelion
Description: A few long-ish leaves at the base, then a straight stem leading to
             a head with very many small, yellow petals.
Locations: Awakening Wood, Snagret Hole.

#63 Seeding Dandelion
Description: A thin stem with a cluster of grey-white seed pod things around
             the head in a sphere.
Locations: Perplexing Pool.

#64 Horsetail
Description: A cluster of straight, light brown stalks with oval-ish, patterned
             heads of the same colour.
Locations: Awakening Wood, Hole of Beasts.

#65 Foxtail
Description: A long, curved stalk ended with a long stretch of feather-like
             spines in brown or yellow.
Locations: Valley of Repose, Wistful Wild.

#66 Glowstem
Description: An LED, its light source at the top.  These are found only in
             caves.
Locations: Subterranean Complex, White Flower Garden, Snagret Hole, Cavern of
           Chaos, Hole of Heroes, Dream Den.

#67 Margaret
Description: These have a few yellow flowers with green stalks and a few small
             leaves.
Locations: Awakening Wood, Frontier Cavern, Snagret Hole, Cavern of Chaos, Hole
           of Heroes.

#68 Fiddlehead
Description: Mottled green, curved stems and flattened, rounded top bits.
Locations: Awakening Wood, Perplexing Pool, White Flower Garden, Bulblax
           Kingdom, Citadel of Spiders, Shower Room, Submerged Castle, Hole of
           Heroes.

#69 Shoot
Description: A stem, bent at places and with some sizeable leaves, more at the
             top.
Locations: Perplexing Pool, Frontier Cavern, Citadel of Spiders, Cavern of
           Chaos, Hole of Heroes, Dream Den.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.5.2. Candypop Buds
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There six types of Candypop Bud and each has different properties.  The
Candypop Bud's job is, in every case, to change the colour of Pikmin thrown
into it.  Five of the types may receive up to 5 Pikmin, while the other can
take only 1.  They are found in various places across the game's 14 caves.

Note that if a Pikmin is thrown into a Candypop Bud of its own colour (this is
not applicable in one case), it does not reduce the number of Pikmin that can
be changed to that colour by that Bud.

#46 Lapis Lazuli Candypop Bud
Properties: This Candypop Bud is one that allows you to gain up to 5 Blue
            Pikmin per flower, in exchange for the same number of
            other-coloured Pikmin.  They are commonly found near to or in
            sublevels previous to water.
Locations: Snagret Hole, sublevel 6 x3
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 5 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 6 x2

#47 Crimson Candypop Bud
Properties: The next, the red-coloured flower, will return up to 5 Red Pikmin
            rather than blue.  These are often found near a boss or near
            hazards involving fire.
Locations: Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 1 x1
           Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 6 x2
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 8 x2

#48 Golden Candypop Bud
Properties: Obviously, being yellow in shade (like Yellow Pikmin, surprise,
            surprise), this Candypop Bud releases up to 5 Yellow Pikmin.
            Usually, they can be located close to a group of Anode Beetles, or
            electrical beams.
Locations: Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 3 x2

#49 Violet Candypop Bud
Properties: Seeing as they are purple, this type yields Purple Pikmin (again,
            amounting to a maximum of 5).  They are found in all manner of
            locations.
Locations: Emergence Cave, sublevel 2 x2      (Disappears with 20+ purples)
           Hole of Beasts, sublevel 2 x2      (Disappears with 20+ purples)
           Hole of Beasts, sublevel 4 x1
           Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 5 x1
           Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 4 x2
           Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 6 x1
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 3 x1
           Citadel of Spiders, sublevel 2 x1  (Disappears with 20+ purples)
           Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 2 x1   (Disappears with 20+ purples)
           Submerged Castle, sublevel 5 x2
           Shower Room, sublevel 2 x1         (Disappears with 20+ purples)
           Shower Room, sublevel 5 x1
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 1 x1     (Disappears with 20+ purples)
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 4 x1
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 5 x1
           Subterranean Complex, sublevel 8 x3
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 5 x1

#50 Ivory Candypop Bud
Properties: This White Pikmin-creating Bud is much like the violet one, in that
            it is, seemingly, found almost at random.  This colour is
            important, as is purple, because it is the only means by which
            White Pikmin can be gained.
Locations: White Flower Garden, sublevel 3 x3
           Citadel of Spider, sublevel 4 x1
           Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 3 x1
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 2 x1
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 3 x1
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 6 x1
           Submerged Castle, sublevel 3 x1
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 3 x1
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 5 x1
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 7 x1
           Subterranean Complex, sublevel 3 x1
           Subterranean Complex, sublevel 4 x3
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 5 x1

#51 Queen Candypop Bud
Properties: Finally, the sixth type.  This is unlike any other in various
            aspects, the first being its capability to only take in 1 Pikmin of
            any colour.  Also, it will release 9 Pikmin, all of the same
            colour, which can only be blue, red or yellow; this depends upon
            the colour of the coloured parts of the flower when the Pikmin was
            thrown into it.  These are mostly found in caves with many
            sublevels, or near to bosses.
Locations: Snagret Hole, sublevel 6 x1
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 7 x2
           Shower Room, sublevel 4 x2
           Subterranean Complex, sublevel 8 x2
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 5 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 5 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 8 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 12 x1

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4.5.3. Beasts
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes:

- A Beady Long Legs can be located in Perplexing Pool after day 30; simply go
straight forwards from the Onions at the start.

- Although they are not in the Piklopedia, swarms of orange bugs can be found
crawling around on the floor in Wistful Wild on days 31, 61, 91, 121, and so
on.  They are very small, and can be considered items in that they are not
actually beasts.  When swarmed with Pikmin, they release vast amounts of pools
of Nectar, Ultra-bitter Spray and Ultra-spicy Spray; but beware them, as they
may also poison any attacking Pikmin.  There are 2 groups, which are to be
found one around the Hole of Heroes' entrance and the other in an alcove near
there.  There is, however, a maximum amount of pools of spray and Nectar that
can exist at once, which is the only reason the amount does not increase
near-infinitely.
(copied from 'Items and Obstacles', section 4.1.4)

- Mamutas plant Pikmin, but they gain flowers whatever their state beforehand,
rather than turning back into leaves, as happens with other beasts that plant
Pikmin.

- Sheargrubs, Shearwigs and Cloaking Burrow-nits can eat bridges that have been
built.

- Ravenous Whiskerpillars eat Burgeoning Spiderworts' berries.

- A group consisting of a Bulbear and several Dwarf Bulbears can be found in
Perplexing Pool after day 30, patrolling near the Onions and the slope beyond
them which leads to the rest of the level.

- Mitites can be randomly found in eggs underground, anywhere there are eggs.

Weights are in Pikmin.

#1 Red Bulborb
Weight: 10
Locations: Valley of Repose x1
           Awakening Wood x1
           Hole of Beasts, sublevel 4 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 9 x1
           Dream Den, sublevel 5 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 14 x2
Strategies: The back is the best place to attack, because it is the furthest
            part from the sharp teeth (and notice the emphasis on 'sharp').
            Creep up from behind, as it is most likely asleep, then throw
            at least 30 Pikmin as quickly as possible, or use 5 purples.  Hope
            that the Bulborb will die before shaking any off.

            This beast is also very easy to defeat with a Captain alone,
            though this is best done in caves due to the amount of time it
            takes.  Watch out for the 2 attacks: shaking and biting.


#2 Hairy Bulborb
Weight: 10
Locations: Frontier Cavern, sublevel 1 x2
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 2 x1
           Subterranean Complex, sublevel 1 x2
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 9 x1
           Dream Den, sublevel 2 x1
           Dream Den, sublevel 14 x1
Strategies: As the Red Bulborb.


#3 Orange Bulborb
Weight: 10
Locations: Wistful Wild x2
           Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 1 x2
           Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 5 x1
           Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 6 x2
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 1 x1
           Shower Room, sublevel 2 x1
           Shower Room, sublevel 6 x1
           Frontier cavern, sublevel 7 x3
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 9 x1
           Dream Den, sublevel 12 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 14 x2
Strategies: This is mainly the same as the Red Bulborb, but you must be more
            cautious when approaching it.  This is due to its eyes always
            being partly open, meaning it is more wary of you and Pikmin.  It
            wakes up sooner when approached, so it is best to run up to and
            attack this beast quickly, before it can retaliate, again from
            behind.


#4 Dwarf Red Bulborb
Weight: 3
Locations: Valley of Repose x1 (and another on day 1 only)
           Awakening Wood x2
           Wistful Wild x5
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 8 x54
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 9 x3
Strategies: If any type of Pikmin is thrown and lands exactly on the back of
            the Dwarf Red Bulborb, it will die immediately; a Purple Pikmin
            landing in a set area around it will end in this as well.
            Otherwise, if you cannot aim very well, three Pikmin should do
            fine, though try to avoid the biting when with large groups of
            Pikmin.

            Even more so than the larger Bulborbs, this beast is very easy to
            kill when Pikmin-less, i.e. with only a Captain.


#5 Snow Bulborb
Weight: 3
Locations: Emergence Cave, sublevel 1 x4
           Emergence Cave, sublevel 2 x8
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 1 x6
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 2 x6
           Subterranean Complex, sublevel 1 x9
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 9 x3
           Dream Den, sublevel 2 x8
Strategies: As the Dwarf Red Bulborb.


#6 Dwarf Orange Bulborb
Weight: 3
Locations: Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 1 x4
           Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 5 x2
           Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 6 x4
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 4 x5
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 5 x7
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 6 x1
           Submerged Castle, sublevel 2 x3
           Shower Room, sublevel 2 x5
           Shower Room, sublevel 5 x5
           Shower Room, sublevel 6 x6
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 7 x10
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 1 x4
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 9 x3
           Dream Den, sublevel 1 x23
Strategies: Alike to the Orange Bulborb, the Dwarf Orange Bulborb is more
            awake than the other small varieties.  This means that the area
            within which you or Pikmin must be to be noticed is a larger one,
            i.e. it can see further.


#7 Spotty Bulbear
Weight: 10
Locations: Perplexing Pool x1
           Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 4 x1
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 3 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 9 x1
           Dream Den, sublevel 3 x1
Strategies: This is a much stronger beast than any of the Bulborbs, and is
            better at moving, turning and swallowing Pikmin on the ground, so
            the easiest strategy to use in order to achieve no Pikmin losses
            is a spray, preferably Ultra-bitter to immobilise it.  The
            situation is often compounded by Dwarf Bulbears near the beast,
            which further strengthens the case for using a spray.

            If you don't have a spray available, use Purple Pikmin; if they're
            not around, try swarming from behind (which is hard to get to
            without it noticing).  Above all, just be careful.  As a final
            resort, a Captain can be used, but this is hard, especially with
            only one and without the Rocket Fist, because the beast regenerates
            its HP.  Fortunately, because of its longer legs, it can be tricked
            into falling down holes in certain underground areas.


#8 Dwarf Bulbear
Weight: 3
Locations: Perplexing Pool x2/3
           Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 1 x8
           Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 4 x4
           Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 5 x10
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 3 x6
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 9 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 3 x9
           Dream Den, sublevel 11 x6
Strategies: This is almost as easy to kill as the Dwarf Red Bulborb and
            similar beasts: simply throw a single Pikmin onto its back.
            However, they have more life, and the Pikmin will take longer to
            kill it; if your aim is not good, you may need five or more Pikmin
            to win.


#9 Bulborb Larva
Weight: N/A (they disappear)
Locations: Frontier Cavern, sublevel 8 (infinite number)
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 11 (infinite number)
Strategies: These are amongst both the easiest and hardest to defeat.  They
            are easy because they can be killed with a single hit from either
            Captain.  They are hard because they are spawned in such large
            numbers, and can kill Pikmin with a single bite, swallowing them
            soon afterwards, so there is little chance of getting them back.
            Because of this, the easiest and best way to defeat these is using
            a Captain, but you must still watch out for the bites, as they are
            harmful and take away a lot of life.

            Nevertheless, the main aim is to destroy the Empress Bulblax, so
            that the flow of these things ceases; see her strategy below.


#10 Fiery Bulblax
Weight: 10
Locations: Valley of Repose x1
           Perplexing Pool x1
           Submerged Castle, sublevel 1 x1
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 2 x3
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 9 x1
           Dream Den, sublevel 5 x1
Strategies: As its body is one of flame, this beast is generally only harmed
            by Red Pikmin, even when paralysed by the Ultra-bitter Spray.
            The only exception to this rule is when it is in water, a fact
            that must be used in a number of cases throughout the game.
            Because it is relatively strong when compared to the majority of
            other beasts, it is advised that you use a lot of Red Pikmin; for
            best effect, a dose of Ultra-spicy Spray can be used, with 20 or
            more reds.  Purple Pikmin can damage these beasts, but only with
            the initial impact, so you must whistle them between throws.
            This is an effective but often dangerous strategy to use.


#11 Water Dumple
Weight: 5
Locations: Valley of Repose x5
           Perplexing Pool x7
           Citadel of Spiders, sublevel 4 x3
           Shower Room, sublevel 3 x4
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 6 x4
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 6 x5
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 6 x3
           Dream Den, sublevel 10 x5
Strategies: These beasts have a big bite that can swallow a number of Pikmin
            at once, so be careful.  However, they take quite a while to
            swallow Pikmin (perhaps as they swallow so many at once), so
            there is time to save them.  The best way to kill these is by
            swarming, as it kills them quickly, giving less time for eating
            Pikmin.


#12 Bulbmin
Weight: 7
Locations: Submerged Castle, sublevel 2 x1
           Submerged Castle, sublevel 3 x1
           Submerged Castle, sublevel 4 x2
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 4 x1
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 6 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 8 x1
Strategies: As these are never asleep, and are found with other, smaller
            beasts (the smaller Bulbmin) they can be compared, as enemies,
            with Spotty Bulbears, though much weaker.  The smaller ones cannot
            attack, though, and are on your side once the larger Bulbmin is
            defeated, which can be done by swarming with many Pikmin, or
            throwing some purples onto it.  If you only have a few non-purples,
            let it approach you, then throw them near the far edge of its back.
            This will cause it to turn around, by which time it may well be
            dead.


#13 Fiery Blowhog
Weight: 7
Locations: Valley of Repose x2
           Perplexing Pool x1
           Wistful Wild x2
           White Flower Garden, sublevel 2 x2
           Submerged Castle, sublevel 1 x2
           Shower Room, sublevel 5 x2
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 1 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 3 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 5 x4
           Dream Den, sublevel 10 x4
           Dream Den, sublevel 11 x2
Strategies: If using Red Pikmin, throw them on like crazy: they can't be hurt,
            only lose their buds or flowers.  If using another type, stand in
            front of the snout until you hear the beast rumbling, then move to
            the side and throw the Pikmin onto its body as it shoots fire.
            Remove them when the beast begins to shake, after which it tries to
            throw them off.

            Now it should shoot fire towards the front again, away from you,
            so repeat the above as many times as is needed.


#14 Watery Blowhog
Weight: 7
Locations: Valley of Repose x1
           Wistful Wild x1
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 3 x2
           Shower Room, sublevel 1 x2
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 1 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 3 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 11 x2
Strategies: As the Fiery Blowhog, but replace 'Red Pikmin' with 'Blue Pikmin'
            and 'fire' with 'water'.


#15 Armored Cannon Beetle Larva
Weight: 7
Locations: Valley of Repose x1
           Wistful Wild x1
           Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 5 x3
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 4 x2
           Subterranean Complex, sublevel 3 x3
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 7 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 4 x10
           Dream Den, sublevel 6 x4
Strategies: Treat these like Fiery/Water Blowhogs: let it fire a boulder, then
            run round and attack from the side, whistling Pikmin before it
            throws them off.  It won't turn as long as you keep the attacks
            coming.


#16 Decorated Cannon Beetle
Weight: 7
Locations: Valley of Repose x2
           Wistful Wild x1
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 2 x2
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 6 x3
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 7 x2
Strategies: These can be killed in the same way as Armored Cannon Beetle
            Larvae, though you need to watch out for the rocks following the
            Captains.  Alternatively, a Captain can be used to lure them into
            firing rocks at themselves; and of course, other enemies, most of
            even the strongest of which are quite easily killed by them.


#17 Puffy Blowhog
Weight: N/A (they disappear)
Locations: Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 3 x1
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 7 x2
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 3 x1
Strategies: Puffy Blowhogs can't kill Pikmin: they only make things difficult,
            especially when there are hazards on the ground the Pikmin could
            get blown into.  Just approach, preferably from the back or side so
            it doesn't see you and try to back away, then throw a lot of Pikmin
            onto the beast.  It will fall to the ground; if it's not dead by
            the time it starts to shake, whistle the Pikmin away and repeat.


#18 Withering Blowhog
Weight: N/A (they disappear)
Locations: Valley of Repose x1
           Perplexing Pool x1
           Wistful Wild x2
           Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 3 x3
           Submerged Castle, sublevel 3 x2
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 7 x2
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 3 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 5 x1
           Dream Den, sublevel 7 x2
Strategies: As the Puffy Blowhog, but be wary of their ability to reduce Pikmin
            to leaves by blowing them.


#19 Gatling Groink
Weight: 10
Locations: Wistful Wild x1
           Subterranean Complex, sublevel 7 x2
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 8 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 2 x1
           Dream Den, sublevel 10 x1
Strategies: Attack with purples if you have them, just throwing them near it
            to stun it then swarming; otherwise, throw from behind or the side,
            or swarm if you can get close enough without it turning to face
            you.  Its attacks are quite easily avoided, provided you pay
            attention.  Retrieve the body quickly, or spray it before death so
            there is no corpse, or move on quickly, or else it will revive.


#20 Iridescent Flint Beetle
Weight: N/A (can't be killed)
Locations: Awakening Wood x1
           Citadel of Spiders, sublevel 5 x1
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 5 x2
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 12 x1
           Dream Den, sublevel 9 x1
Strategies: Throw Pikmin directly on top of it to flip it; this can be done
            three times, each of which rewards you with Nectar or a spray.
            Purples obviously make the job easier, as there's less need for
            accuracy.


#21 Iridescent Glint Beetle
Weight: N/A (can't be killed)
Locations: Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 4 x1
           Submerged Castle, sublevel 4 x1
Strategies: As the Iridescent Flint Beetle, but they normally only yield one
            reward, often a treasure.


#22 Doodlebug
Weight: N/A (can't be killed)
Locations: Shower Room, sublevel 6 x1
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 1 x3
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 12 x1
           Dream Den, sublevel 9 x2
Strategies: As the Iridescent Flint Beetle, but they release poison in small
            amounts as they move, which they do in sudden, infrequent-ish
            bursts.


#23 Female Sheargrub
Weight: 1
Locations: Awakening Wood x3 groups
           Hole of Beasts, sublevel 1 x2 groups
           White Flower Garden, sublevel 1 x2 groups
           Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 2 x1 group
           Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 3 x3 groups
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 1 x2 groups
Strategies: Swarm or throw; they're harmless.


#24 Male Sheargrub
Weight: 1
Locations: Awakening Wood x1 group
           Hole of Beasts, sublevel 1 x2 groups
           White Flower Garden, sublevel 1 x2 groups
           Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 2 x4
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 1 x4
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 1 x2 groups
Strategies: Swarming works best, but thrown purples make it quick.


#25 Shearwig
Weight: 1
Locations: Perplexing Pool x4/5 groups
           Wistful Wild x1 group
           Citadel of Spiders, sublevel 1 x3 groups
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 2 x3
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 1 x1 group
Strategies: Swarming is the best option: because of their size, a throw will
            usually miss.  If any fly, a single, accurately thrown Pikmin is
            enough for a kill.


#26 Cloaking Burrow-nit
Weight: 8
Locations: Valley of Repose x1
           Awakening Wood x3
           Wistful Wild x1
           Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 2 x1
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 2 x2
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 7 x3
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 1 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 11 x4
Strategies: Swarm from the front with a lot of Pikmin, quickly; keep attacking
            if it grabs one, and it shouldn't die.  Alternatively, thrown
            purples (5 or more) should stun it quite nicely for an easier kill.


#27 Ravenous Whiskerpillar
Weight: 1
Locations:
Strategies: They're harmless, so just swarm them.


#28 Anode Dweevil
Weight: 3
Locations: Submerged Castle, sublevel 3 x2
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 14 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 8 x3
Strategies: As with all Dweevils, these must have Pikmin thrown at them to be
            harmed with any efficiency; you should be aiming at the small head.
            Because they're fast-moving and the target is small, you might miss
            quite a lot: be sure to whistle Pikmin back if it looks like it'll
            attack and you're not using yellows.  If it picks up something,
            throw Pikmin at it to make it drop whatever it is, so that it can
            be harmed.


#29 Mitite
Weight: 1
Locations: Hole of Heroes, sublevel 10 x2 groups
           (Mitites can appear anywhere underground where there are eggs, but
            the above is the only definite location I am aware of.)
Strategies: These come out of eggs in random places (even Honeywisps' eggs...),
            and can't be harmed by swarming; all but purples run around in
            madness, so those are best-suited to attacking with, especially
            since one can kill almost all of the Mitites at the same time.


#30 Hermit Crawmad
Weight: 5
Locations: Perplexing Pool x2
           Wistful Wild x1
           Citadel of Spiders, sublevel 4 x2
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 6 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 1 x2
Strategies: Approach the nest-thing until it appears, wait for it to lunge,
            then retreat, swarming your Pikmin away.  If it doesn't get hold of
            one, it'll be slow to get back in its hole, so swarm it from
            behind to, hopefully, kill it before it returns.  If not, repeat.


#31 Swooping Snitchbug
Weight: 3
Locations: Perplexing Pool x2
           Wistful Wild x1
           Citadel of Spiders, sublevel 3 x3
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 3 x1
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 4 x2
           Subterranean Complex, sublevel 2 x1
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 2 x3
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 2 x2
Strategies: Throw Pikmin up at it; it's usually stillest while carrying Pikmin
            it's picked up, and it won't plant these if you bring it to the
            ground quickly enough.  If it gets back up, you should be able to
            bring it back down without it moving away.


#32 Bumbling Snitchbug
Weight: 3
Locations: Shower Room, sublevel 6 x1
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 4 x3
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 9 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 2 x1
           Dream Den, sublevel 7 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 11 x1
Strategies: Attack like a Swooping Snitchbug; if it picks up a Captain, rotate
            the Analogue Stick for a bit to get free.  It's a bit stronger,
            but shouldn't really ever be a problem.


#33 Careening Dirigibug
Weight: 3
Locations: Submerged Castle, sublevel 2 x1
           Submerged Castle, sublevel 4 x1
           Subterranean Complex, sublevel 3 x3
           Subterranean Complex, sublevel 6 x2
           Subterranean Complex, sublevel 7 x1
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 1 x3
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 9 x2
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 2 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 3 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 7 x4
Strategies: These should be approached carefully because of the dangers of
            bomb rocks.  Attack enough with thrown Pikmin to make it fall to
            the ground, then retreat if a bomb rock was dropped and is near
            enough to be a problem.  There should be time for it to explode
            and you to drop the beast again before it manages to produce
            another bomb rock, so that all that remains is to attack it
            constantly.


#34 Antenna Beetle
Weight: 3
Locations: Snagret Hole, sublevel 5 x1
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 6 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 2 x1
           Dream Den, sublevel 12 x1
Strategies: They only land every now and then, in roughly the same area.  Try
            to swarm it as it falls over on landing, as if it's not attacked
            enough, it'll whistle your Pikmin to its side.  It takes quite a
            while to kill it without purples or Ultra-bitter Spray because it
            likes to jump off again quickly, so use either of those if it's
            taking too long.


#35 Lesser Spotted Jellyfloat
Weight: N/A (they disappear)
Locations: Shower Room, sublevel 2 x1
           Shower Room, sublevel 3 x4
           Shower Room, sublevel 5 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 15 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 1 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 10 x2
Strategies: Just throw a lot of Pikmin on, as quickly as you can.  They have
            quite a lot of life, but any Pikmin they suck up won't die for a
            long time, so there's no real threat here unless one manages to
            apprehend all of your Pikmin.


#36 Greater Spotted Jellyfloat
Weight: N/A (they disappear)
Locations: Shower Room, sublevel 3 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 15 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 6 x1
Strategies: Just as the lesser variety, but they're able to capture Captains
            too.  To get free, rotate the Analogue Stick.


#37 Fiery Dweevil
Weight: 3
Locations: Citadel of Spiders, sublevel 2 x3
           Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 2 x2
           Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 6 x3
           Submerged Castle, sublevel 2 x3
           Subterranean Complex, sublevel 6 x2
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 14 x3
           Dream Den, sublevel 8 x4
Strategies: As the Anode Dweevil, but of course it's less vital that you remove
            Pikmin when it attacks because it won't kill them instantly.


#38 Anode Beetle
Weight: 3
Locations: Citadel of Spiders, sublevel 3 x9
           Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 3 x10
           Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 6 x6
           Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 4 x5
           Submerged Castle, sublevel 3 x4
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 4 x8
           Subterranean Complex, sublevel 6 x6
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 6 x6
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 2 x6
           Dream Den, sublevel 3 x8
Strategies: If you have enough yellows, attack with them only, throwing until
            it flips over then swarming; otherwise, purples help in flipping
            them (they're harmless when upside-down), or just aim carefully to
            flip them on the first throw.


#39 Caustic Dweevil
Weight: 3
Locations: Subterranean Complex, sublevel 6 x2
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 5 x2
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 14 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 8 x3
Strategies: As the Fiery Dweevil.


#40 Munge Dweevil
Weight: 3
Locations: Shower Room, sublevel 6 x2
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 14 x3
           Dream Den, sublevel 8 x3
Strategies: As the Fiery Dweevil.


#41 Volatile Dweevil
Weight: N/A (boom?)
Locations: Submerged Castle, sublevel 4 x4
           Shower Room, sublevel 6 x1
           Subterranean Complex, sublevel 5 x5
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 3 x5
Strategies: Go near it to set it off, then retreat.  It's not quicker than
            Captains or Pikmin, so it shouldn't be a problem: just be sure not
            to attack it.


#42 Toady Bloyster
Weight: 3
Locations: Perplexing Pool x1
Strategies: Staying away from the front, throw Pikmin on the bud-like appendage
            at the back.  It's quite weak, so it won't take long to kill if
            you're accurate enough.


#43 Yellow Wollywog
Weight: 7
Locations: Awakening Wood x2
           Perplexing Pool x3/4
           Wistful Wild x1
           Citadel of Spiders, sublevel 2 x2
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 6 x2
Strategies: This is very easy with a few thrown purples, as it'll be stunned
            and unable to move.  If you can't use any, wait for it to jump,
            avoid its landing, then swarm it quickly or throw Pikmin on.  If
            there's nothing else about to get in the way and you've attacked
            with enough, none should die: it'll jump on the spot, not landing
            on any Pikmin.  Feel free to throw more on as this takes place.


#44 Wollywog
Weight: 7
Locations: Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 4 x1
           Submerged Castle, sublevel 3 x1
           Shower Room, sublevel 1 x1
           Shower Room, sublevel 3 x1
           Shower Room, sublevel 5 x1
           Shower Room, sublevel 6 x1
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 6 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 10 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 12 x2
Strategies: As the Yellow Wollywog.


#45 Wogpole
Weight: 1
Locations: Awakening Wood x3
			 Perplexing Pool x5
			 Shower Room, sublevel 1 x5
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 6 x5
Strategies: These are harmless; if you feel the need to kill them, just chuck
            a few Pikmin about near them.  They'll take a while to catch up,
            but should kill the beasts in the end.


#52 Creeping Chrysanthemum
Weight: 10
Locations: Awakening Wood x2
           Wistful Wild x3
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 2 x2
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 3 x5
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 1 x2
Strategies: First, throw a single Pikmin where the eyed Margaret indicating its
            presence is, staying well back with all other Pikmin.  As with most
            enemies, this is easily killed with a few Purple Pikmin thrown on
            top or near it to stun it, followed by swarming; but in their
            absence, just throw Pikmin on it, whistling as it raises its mouth
            to shake them off.  Stay back as it takes a bite, which will leave
            it open to further attack - swarm it when it misses and rolls
            around.


#53 Skitter Leaf
Weight: 1
Locations: Perplexing Pool x5
           Citadel of Spiders, sublevel 1 x2
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 1 x4
Strategies: Like Wogpoles, they're harmless, but are easiest to kill using
            Captains or by swarming a few Pikmin over them.


#54 Unmarked Spectralids
Weight: 1
Locations: Awakening Wood x2 groups
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 5 x1 group
           Shower Room, sublevel 5 x1 group
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 5 x1 group
Strategies: If you come across a swarm of these, throw Pikmin into it to knock
            as many as you can out of the sky, at which they'll die and yield
            Nectar if yellow or a spray if red or blue.


#55 Honeywisp
Weight: N/A (can't be killed)
Locations: Awakening Wood x2
           White Flower Garden, sublevel 3 x1
           Perplexing Pool x1
           Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 4 x3
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 5 x4
Strategies: These can't be killed, but throw a Pikmin at its egg quickly when
            it appears to get the Nectar, sprays or even Mitites within.


#56 Mamuta
Weight: 7
Locations: Frontier Cavern, sublevel 5 x4
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 3 x2
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 5 x2
Strategies: These can't kill Pikmin, but are annoying because they plant them.
            Preferably throw to kill, as swarming will get your Pikmin planted.
            Of course, if you have the Pluckaphone, you might want this to
            happen, as they receive flowers when it does.


#57 Breadbug
Weight: 3
Locations: Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 2 x2
           Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 3 x2
           Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 4 x2
           Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 6 x2
           Dream Den, sublevel 11 x1
Strategies: Every Breadbug has a nest/hole-type thing, and it wanders around,
            looking for things to drag back there - including anything Pikmin
            can carry.  The easiest way to kill it is to order Pikmin to carry
            whatever it's got; add enough and they'll overpower it.  When the
            corpse/treasure is collected, the Breadbug will lose almost half
            of its life.

            If there's nothing left for it to drag away, throw Pikmin at it;
            this takes longer and requires that they land on its back, but does
            work.  Killing the beast means its hole disappears, and anything
            it managed to collect appears where it was.


#70 Empress Bulblax
Weight: 20
Locations: Hole of Beasts, sublevel 5 x1
           Frontier Cavern, sublevel 8 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 11 x1
Strategies: This boss is encountered three times in the game, each time with
            added difficulty.  It can be harmed by swarming or throwing Pikmin,
            the latter of which is preferential because it keeps Pikmin out
            from under its body, where they're safe.  As it shakes them off,
            whistle them, then retreat to somewhere safe in case rocks fall
            from above (occurs in the latter two battles).  Defeating the
            Empress herself isn't too hard: it's the Bulborb Larvae that pose
            the problem; strategies for individual cases are found in the cave
            guides (section 4.4.3).


#71 Burrowing Snagret
Weight: 5
Locations: Valley of Repose x1
           Awakening Wood x1
           White Flower Garden, sublevel 5 x1
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 3 x2
           Snagret Hole, sublevel 6 x2
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 4 x1
Strategies: Burrowing Snagrets only emerge from the ground when you or Pikmin
            approach; every so often, they get stuck in doing so: this is a
            perfect time to swarm it or throw Pikmin, especially purples, at
            its head.  You can either play it safe and run away every time it
            makes a smooth exit, or you can throw Pikmin quickly onto its head,
            which should kill it in one round if you throw them well enough,
            even if you don't have many.  If it eats some, they will be fine if
            it dies fairly soon after, but if you attack it enough, it won't
            make any attempts to do so before burrowing back underground.


#72 Beady Long Legs
Weight: N/A (they disappear)
Locations: Perplexing Pool x1
           Citadel of Spiders, sublevel 5 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 14 x1
Strategies: Because of its height, this boss is most easily killed using Yellow
            Pikmin.  Its body is weakest, and since they are thrown high enough
            to reach it at any time, they're the best choice.  Other colours
            can reach the body, but only when the creature stops to rest and
            lower it, which happens after it's stomped around for a while.
            This, by the way, is the only thing you need to watch out for,
            hazard-wise, making sure no Pikmin are where its legs will fall.


#73 Emperor Bulblax
Weight: 20
Locations: Bulblax Kingdom, sublevel 7 x1
           Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 4 x2
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 10 x2
Strategies: The Emperor Bulblax is always found underground with only its eyes
            visible, and erupts out of it when you or Pikmin approach.  It is
            harmed by Pikmin attacking its face, or if it eats a bomb rock,
            and of course purples can stun it.  If bomb rocks are around, you
            can lure it into into eating them by standing near them, at which
            it will attack with its tongue.

            The beast's attacks are a roar that sends all but Purple Pikmin
            running around; a small jump that kills any Pikmin beneath it; a
            shake that throws any attacking Pikmin off itself; and its tongue,
            which reaches out for Pikmin to eat.  It is most easily killed by
            throwing purples at its eyes when underground: they should end up
            on its face, the beast stunned, and it will die before it recovers.
            Where neither purples nor bomb rocks are available or usable, stay
            well back, throwing Pikmin on its face a few at a time and
            whistling them when it shakes.


#74 Giant Breadbug
Weight: 10
Locations: Glutton's Kitchen, sublevel 6 x1
Strategies: As Breadbugs, but with more HP.  Only Purple Pikmin can harm them
            when thrown on top, and their height makes this harder to do.


#75 Pileated Snagret
Weight: 5
Locations: Snagret Hole, sublevel 7 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 4 x1
Strategies: The Pileated Snagret is, in my opinion, one of the hardest beasts
            to defeat in the game.  It waits underground like a Burrowing
            Snagret and emerges similarly, thankfully getting stuck more often.
            Its head is larger and so easier to reach, but it is higher up and
            the boss is able to move around on its one leg, chasing Pikmin
            across the room, though you should still be able to get away when
            you need to.

            As before, if you wait until it struggles to get out of the ground,
            then swarm the head, it should rebury itself without attacking.
            Throwing a constant stream of purples on its head as it emerges is
            effective in making its exit slow, giving your Pikmin more time to
            attack, but it cannot be stunned.  Because of its great amount of
            HP, it makes sense to use multiple sprays of either or both types
            here, to make the battle that bit quicker and easier.


#76 Man-at-legs
Weight: N/A (they disappear)
Locations: Subterranean Complex, sublevel 9 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 13 x1
Strategies: The Man-at-legs appears hard at first, but really isn't.  Begin
            by throwing Pikmin on its still body, at which it will awake.  If
            you can use purples here, almost all its life can be initially
            removed, and throwing them back on quickly can kill it before it
            attacks.

            However, this is unlikely.  Usually, it will start to attack: take
            any Pikmin near it and hide behind some obstacle, of which there
            are usually sufficient where it's found.  Once the shooting stops,
            throw Pikmin onto its body (if they're not yellow, you may have to
            wait for it to tire and lower it so it's reachable), and repeat as
            it begins to attack again.


#77 Ranging Bloyster
Weight: 3
Locations: Shower Room, sublevel 7 x1
           Hole of Heroes, sublevel 7 x1
Strategies: If you have any leaf-topped Purple Pikmin, it is best to leave them
            behind due to their unbelievable slowness.  Separate the Captains,
            giving one the Pikmin, and enter the annoyingly small arena to
            start the battle music.

            Get close to the boss with the Pikminless Captain, whom I will call
            Louie for the sake of ease.  Notice the Ranging Bloyster's tail-bud
            turn blue, along with its eyes, and that it begins to move towards
            Louie.  Switch to Olimar and the colours will change to red, the
            target to him.  Take Louie around the side opposite to Olimar, and
            wait until the boss faces him.  At that point, switch Captains
            twice, so that you have control of Louie still, and then switch
            back to Olimar just as the boss turns red.

            If timed correctly, this will confuse the Ranging Bloyster, who
            will turn blue and then red again before beginning to even turn
            around or shake off the Pikmin that should, by now, have been
            thrown onto the bud on its back by Olimar.  Just a single attack
            should be enough to defeat the boss; if not, repeat the process
            once more.


#78 Waterwraith
Weight: N/A (they disappear)
Locations: Submerged Castle, sublevel 5 x1
Strategies: When this enemy appears, you will hear a whistling, see a shadow
            and, before long, the Waterwraith will land.  After it finishes
            blobbing about a bit and looks like it is going to move, attack
            with Purple Pikmin, throwing them on top, at which it will turn
            purple (= vulnerable to any Pikmin) and cower in fear.  Throw any
            Pikmin back on when they are thrown off and repeat; when the boss
            turns clear again, wait and just before it rolls off, attack once
            more with purples.  This phase of the battle will end in no time.

            After its life is completely drained, the Waterwraith will lose its
            stone wheels and run around in what we can suppose is fear of your
            Pikmin's purpleness.  Attack when it runs out of puff, similarly to
            before, and it should be no trouble.


#79 Segmented Crawbster
Weight: 20
Locations: Cavern of Chaos, sublevel 10 x1
Strategies: Because this is encountered only once, I'll copy the sublevel
            guide from earlier on:

            Take all of your Pikmin into the arena where battle will take place
            and walk forwards until a shadow appears.  Walk left or right (your
            choice) so that you are between the falling boss and a wall, and
            then spray your Pikmin with an Ultra-spicy Spray.

            What follows next is the beast's attack.  It will roll up into a
            ball after having located you and your Pikmin, then roll towards
            the wall.  Move out of the way, and the Segmented Crawbster will
            hit the wall and lay upside-down, flashing, bulbous stomach
            showing.  The best way to avoid the boulders that fall is to swarm
            your Pikmin squad around the boss, so that you are on its side
            opposite the wall, just under what is probably a head.

            Proceed to position the Captain under control just to the side of
            the boss, as quickly as possible.  The distance is important - so
            that the Pikmin get up onto the top, not hit its side and bounce
            off onto the floor.  Throw the Pikmin up as quickly as you can
            manage.  A single Ultra-bitter Spray is good enough to win in one
            round of battle if you act quickly; if you have none, or don't want
            to waste any, whistle your Pikmin off as the Segmented Crawbster
            begins to rise, and run to the opposite wall, repeating the same
            feat as at the start of the battle.

            Although it depends on your speed, the sprays you use, the Pikmin
            you have and how many make it up on top of the beast each time,
            expect a battle that lasts no more than 3 rounds.  


#80 Raging Long Legs
Weight: N/A (they disappear)
Locations: Hole of Heroes, sublevel 15 x1
Strategies: Take as many Pikmin as you want to the fight, and wander about
            until the boss lands.  Firstly, the safest place for your Pikmin is
            definitely the body, and it's not hard to miss.  The strategy is
            basically the same as for the Beady Long Legs, but things get a bit
            messier because its feet are so much bigger that it's hard to
            whistle Pikmin away without squishification.

            It is actually quite quick and simple to use a group of perhaps 15
            purples, and simply keep throwing and whistling, so that they're
            practically always attacking.  An Ultra-spicy spray makes this even
            easier.


#81 Titan Dweevil
Weight: N/A (they disappear)
Locations: Dream Den, sublevel 14 x1
Strategies: There are a number of ways to go about coming out of this fight
            with all of your Pikmin, but first, go into the arena and make your
            presence known to the Titan Dweevil.  It is, now, the most popular
            course of action to remove all non-Yellow Pikmin to the relative
            safety of the alcove the exit geyser is in, and not without good
            cause.  The reasoning is two-fold: the boss is high up, so yellows
            are best-suited to reach it; and its electricity-based weapon, the
            only thing that will bring about an instant kill, is ineffective
            against them.

            You can see quite clearly four peculiar instruments on the beast's
            body: these are treasures, used as weapons against you by the
            Dweevil.  The aim for the moment is to remove these by throwing
            your Pikmin onto them.  I will say now that petrification does
            work, but is not overly effective as it reduces the damage taken by
            the weapons.  Ultra-spicy Sprays are very useful here, however, and
            it is well worth it to use all that you have in this battle.

            Begin by going after the tap, the water-based weapon; throw your
            Pikmin onto it and they will attack.  Aiming properly can be
            difficult, what with all that Dweevil in the way and with it moving
            about; try to stand directly underneath the target.  Every so
            often, the boss will shake off Pikmin and attack with a random
            weapon: fire, electricity, poison or water:

            If it is fire, run away and then, once it starts, run around behind
            the boss and attack whatever you can from there, seeing as the
            flame cannot rotate fully and is locked into a set path of motion
            after it begins.

            If it is poison, run.  Try to get out of the arena until it stops.

            If it is water, switch Captains and wait it out, whistling any
            Pikmin that get hit there and then switching back, repeating the
            whistling process back in the arena.  It is this capability to
            reach all of your Pikmin that makes the tap our first target.

            If it is electricity, ignore it.  Replace your Pikmin on whatever
            they were attacking.  Note that Captains are temporarily
            immobilised by all four of these attacks, but not at all damaged.
            The fire is by far the worst for Captains, rendering them immobile
            until the attack stops, unless you mash the buttons enough to get
            back on your feet quickly.

            Move on, next, to fire or poison, then the other, then electricity.
            If you fear that you will lose all of your yellows, remove the
            electricity first, then bring all but Purple Pikmin into the battle
            (their low mobility is hard to cope with here).  After the removal
            of all four implements of doom, attack with all Pikmin: the boss is
            now incapable of killing any, only swiping at them to throw them
            off.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
